.in is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for India. It was introduced in May 1989. It is currently administered by the National Internet Exchange of India.


== Registry operator ==
The domain was originally managed by the National Centre for Software Technology (NCST), Mumbai and its Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC). The Government of India issued an executive order in 2004 to transfer responsibility for managing .in domains to the newly created INRegistry under the authority of the National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI). The National Informatics Centre (NIC), ERNET, and the Ministry of Defence were appointed as registrars for the gov.in, res.in and ac.in, and the mil.in domains respectively.
From August 2012 to February 2019, the registry was managed under contract by Afilias India Pvt. Ltd, a  subsidiary of Afilias. 
In August 2018, NIXI appointed Neustar Data Infotech (India), a subsidiary of Neustar, Inc., to be the country's new registry services provider. Neustar completed migration of existing .in domains to its registry infrastructure in March 2019. Neustar added the ability to register Indian-language domains in native script by enabling end-to-end web portal language support.
in February 2025, Tucows announced it won the contract to run the backend registry services for India’s .in country code domain. The company is migrating about 4 million .in domains to its platform.


== Second-level domains ==
As of 2005, liberalised policies for the .in domain allow unlimited second-level registrations under .in. Unlimited registrations under the previously structured existing zones are also allowed:

.in (available to anyone; used by companies, individuals, and organisations in India)
.co.in (intended for banks, registered companies, and trademarks)
.com.in (available to anyone; used by companies, individuals, and organisations in India)
.firm.in (intended for shops, partnerships, liaison offices, sole proprietorships)
.net.in (intended for Internet service providers)
.org.in (intended for nonprofit organisations)
.gen.in (intended for general/miscellaneous use)
.ind.in (intended for individuals)
Zones reserved for use by qualified institutions in India:

.ernet.in (older, used by both educational and research institutes)
.ac.in (used by academic institutions)
.edu.in (used by educational institutions)
.res.in (used by Indian research institutes)
.gov.in (used by the Indian government and state governments)
.mil.in (used by Indian military organisations)
.bank.in (used by Indian Banking Institutions)
.fin.in (used by Indian Financial and other Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFCs))
The domain .nic.in is reserved for India's National Informatics Centre, but in practice most Indian government agencies have domains ending in .nic.in.
The .in registry launched following second-level domains on 29 October 2021 to benefit the growing market:

.5g.in
.6g.in
.ai.in
.am.in
.bihar.in
.biz.in
.business.in
.ca.in
.cn.in
.com.in
.coop.in
.cs.in
.delhi.in
.dr.in
.er.in
.gujarat.in
.info.in
.int.in
.internet.in
.io.in
.me.in
.pg.in
.post.in
.pro.in
.travel.in
.tv.in
.uk.in
.up.in
.us.in
Before the introduction of liberalised registration policies for the .in domain, only 7000 names had been registered between 1992 and 2004. As of March 2010, the number had increased to over 610,000 domain names with 60% of registrations coming from India and the rest from overseas. By October 2011, the number had surpassed 1 million domain names. As of March 2016, the number has more than doubled to over 2 million domain names.


== Restrictions on use of .in domains ==
As per the terms and conditions of the .in registry, domain privacy is not allowed.
Recently updated EKYC guidelines were issued to all registrars to authenticate new registrants. Hence, the previous rule relating to bulk booking of .in domain names has been withdrawn. Now customers can book unlimited .in domain names as previously in line with promoting .in TLD on par with other popular TLDs like .com and others which also has no restrictions relating to bulk booking.


== Internationalised domain names and country codes ==
India plans to introduce internationalised domain names in the 22 local languages used in the country. As of October 2016, fifteen of these internationalised domain names were accepted by ICANN:

.भारत (Devanagari), became available with the following zones:

.ভারত (Bengali), available as of 2017
.ਭਾਰਤ (Gurmukhī), only ਡਾਟਾਮੇਲ.ਭਾਰਤ as of August 2017
.ભારત (Gujarati), available as of 2017
.இந்தியா (Tamil), available as of 2015
.భారత్ (Telugu), available as of 2017
.بھارت (Urdu) only ڈاٹامیل.بھارت as of August 2017 (mainly right-to-left character order)
In 2016, an application for eight further domains was accepted. While the Indian government also applied for .বাংলা (Bengali), it was given to a competing applicant, the Bangladesh Telecommunication Company Limited (BTCL).These domains were not available (as of October 2016): But, they were later on made available and now are open for domain registration in India.

.ಭಾರತ (Kannada)
.ভাৰত (Assamese)
بارت. (Kashmiri)
.ഭാരതം (Malayalam)
.ଭାରତ (Odia)
.भारतम् (Sanskrit)
.भारोत (Santali)
ڀارت. (Sindhi)


== See also ==
Internet in India


== References ==


== External links and references ==
IANA Whois information
whois information
Policies from the INRegistry website
List of Accredited registrars for .in

The 2018 BRICS summit is the tenth annual BRICS summit, an international relations conference attended by the heads of state or heads of government of the five member states of BRICS at the time: Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. The summit was held in Johannesburg, South Africa, the second time that South Africa has hosted the summit with the first being the 2013 summit.
Convened with the theme of "BRICS in Africa: Collaboration for Inclusive Growth and Shared Prosperity in the 4th Industrial Revolution", the next BRICS Summit set to take place in Brazil, have enjoyed the full support of the other member states along with its Chairship in 2019.


== Results ==
The three-day meeting of the 5 heads of state ended in key outcomes: Upholding commitment to the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, the hosting of BRICS-Africa Outreach and the 2nd BRICS Plus Cooperation with Emerging Markets and Developing Countries (EMDCs), establishment of the BRICS Energy Research Cooperation Platform and BRICS Agricultural Research Platform, establishment of the BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution (PartNIR), as well as a Working Group on Tourism.


== Participating leaders ==


== References ==

The 2019 BRICS summit was the eleventh annual BRICS summit, an international relations conference to be attended by the heads of state or heads of government of the five member states Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. The meeting was held at the Itamaraty Palace, where the Brazilian Ministry of Foreign Affairs is located. The Brazilian capital hosted the BRICS summit for the second time. The Sherpa meeting was held in the Brazilian city of Curitiba between March 14 and 15.


== Theme and priorities ==
The name of the chosen theme was: BRICS: economic growth for an innovative future.
The following topics were discussed: strengthening of the cooperation in science, technology and innovation, enhancement of the cooperation on digital economy, invigoration of the cooperation on the fight against transnational crime, especially against organized crime, money laundering, and drug trafficking, and encouragement to the rapprochement between the New Development Bank (NDB) and the BRICS Business Council.
An official joint declaration of the participating countries stated that "we reaffirm our fundamental commitment to the principle of sovereignty, mutual respect and equality and to the shared goal of building a peaceful, stable and prosperous world."


== Participating leaders ==


== References ==

The 2020 BRICS summit was the twelfth annual BRICS summit, an international relations conference attended by the heads of state or heads of government of the five member states Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. The meeting was originally scheduled to take place in Saint Petersburg from July 21 to 23, 2020, but was changed to a video conference held on November 17 due to the outbreak of the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Russia last chaired 7th BRICS summit, Ufa. The 1st Sherpa meeting was held in Saint Petersburg between 11 and 13 February 2020, under chairmanship of Sergei Ryabkov, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and Russian Sherpa for BRICS.


== Participating leaders ==


== References ==

The 2021 BRICS summit is the thirteenth annual BRICS summit, an international relations conference attended by the heads of state or heads of government of the five member states Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. It was the third time that India hosted the BRICS Summit after 2012 and 2016. The summit was hosted virtually by video conference. The summit was taken virtually from New Delhi, India. 


== Meetings ==
India hosted the first meeting of BRICS finance and central bank deputies through video conference. The meeting was co-chaired by Michael Patra, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India and Tarun Bajaj, Secretary Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, India.


== Participating leaders ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Lt Gen Prakash Katoch (27 March 2021). About Turn sans Trust will be Foolish. Indian Defence Review.


== External links ==
Official website

The 2022 BRICS summit is the fourteenth  annual BRICS summit, an international relations conference attended by the heads of state or heads of government of the five member states Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. It was the third time that China hosted the BRICS Summit after 2011 and 2017. The summit was hosted virtually by video conference.


== Participating leaders ==


== Reserve currency ==
A major development on the summit was creation of a new, basket type reserve currency. The currency, combines BRICS currencies and is backed by precious metals.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to 2022 BRICS summit at Wikimedia Commons

Official website

The 2023 BRICS summit was the fifteenth annual BRICS summit, an international relations conference attended by the heads of state or heads of government of the five member states: Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa. South African President Cyril Ramaphosa also invited the leaders of 67 countries to the summit.


== Summit events ==


=== BRICS expansion ===
Several countries have expressed interest in joining the BRICS group. At the summit, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that Argentina, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates have been invited to join the bloc. Full membership took effect on 1 January 2024.


== Participating leaders ==


=== Other attendees ===


== Controversies ==


=== Participation of Vladimir Putin ===

In March 2023, the International Criminal Court (ICC) issued an arrest warrant against Russian President Vladimir Putin for war crimes during the Russian invasion of Ukraine. South Africa is required as an ICC signatory to honour the warrant.
In May 2023, the South African government, led by the African National Congress (ANC), granted all invited leaders diplomatic immunity. It remained unclear at the time whether this would prevent Putin from being arrested if he attended. According to the Department of International Relations and Cooperation, it was standard practice in South Africa to confer such immunity to attendees of international conferences held in the country. 
By early June 2023, moving the summit to China was being considered to avoid the issue. In mid-July 2023, Vladimir Putin announced that he would not attend the summit "by mutual agreement" and would instead be sending Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov.


=== Narendra Modi's refusal to disembark plane ===

On 22 August 2023, Daily Maverick reported that India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi refused to get off his plane until the deputy president of South Africa was dispatched to welcome him instead of the government cabinet minister that was present to conduct the airport welcome. The South African government denied that Modi had refused to disembark his plane, saying that Ramaphosa was unable to meet Modi at the airport due to scheduling difficulties, and adding that it was common for government ministers to welcome visiting heads of state.  
Following the publication of the story, the Daily Maverick experienced a sustained DDOS attack from India, which forced it to temporarily block access to the site from the country. The editor-in-chief of the Daily Maverick speculated that the reason for the DDOS attack was to prevent people in India from reading the article.


=== Nonattendance by Xi Jinping ===
Despite meeting with host Cyril Ramaphosa earlier in the day and attending the BRICS dinner afterward, Chinese leader Xi Jinping unexpectedly did not attend the BRICS business forum where he had been scheduled to speak and instead his speech was read out by Minister of Commerce of China Wang Wentao.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website

The 2024 BRICS summit was the sixteenth annual BRICS summit, held in Kazan, Russia. It was the first BRICS summit to include Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, and the United Arab Emirates as members, following their accession to the organization at the 15th BRICS summit.


== Outcome ==
The theme of the event was: “Strengthening Multilateralism for Fair Global Development and Security.”
UN Secretary-General António Guterres spoke about the Russian invasion of Ukraine and said: "We need peace in Ukraine. A just peace in line with the UN Charter, international law and UN General Assembly resolutions."
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas attended the summit, and BRICS leaders called in a statement for the establishment of a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders.
BRICS members introduced a payment system named BRICS Pay designed to facilitate transactions and the interchange of financial information between central banks of partnered nations, serving as an alternative to the Western interbank system SWIFT. This system will facilitate international settlements.
The BRICS Kazan Declaration has been adopted. BRICS nations endorse reform of the UN and Security Council and the full participation of the State of Palestine in the United Nations, contingent upon the two-state solution. The Kazan Declaration expressed deep concern over the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian Territory, particularly the escalation of violence in Gaza and the West Bank, which resulted in significant civilian harm and displacement. The declaration also noted alarm over the situation in Southern Lebanon and called for an immediate cessation of hostilities. Additionally, it highlighted the adverse impact of unilateral sanctions on the global economy and the achievement of sustainable development goals. BRICS nations consented to deliberate and investigate the feasibility of creating an autonomous cross-border settlement and depository system. The finance ministers of BRICS nations will persist in evaluating the utilization of national currencies, payment tools, and platforms during the forthcoming Presidency and will report on the outcomes.
The Kazan Declaration emphasized adherence to the UN Charter and supported diplomatic efforts for a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Ukraine.
On 24 October, Russia hosted a plenary session of the 16th BRICS Summit in the BRICS Plus/Outreach format, bringing together CIS leaders, delegations from Asian, African, Middle Eastern, and Latin American countries, and the heads of several international organizations.
Thirteen nations have been added as partner countries of BRICS: Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Nigeria, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam.


=== Bilateral meetings ===


==== China-Russia ====

Chinese leader Xi Jinping and Russian President Vladimir Putin held a bilateral meeting in Kazan. The presidents affirmed that the China–Russia relations are profound and unchanging even in the current turbulent geo-political situation, and agreed that they must persist in advancing the comprehensive integration of the Belt and Road Initiative with the Eurasian Economic Union, therefore facilitating and bolstering the high-quality advancement of their economies. The parties concurred that, in light of the 80th anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations and the 80th anniversary of the victory in World War II in 2025, China and the Russian Federation will persist in enhancing their comprehensive strategic cooperation and upholding the international system centered on the United Nations. The participants articulated their intention to enhance the BRICS cooperation framework and to achieve "Greater BRICS Cooperation".
Russia expressed interests in an alternative international payment solutions among BRICS nation to avoid US secondary sanctions.


==== India-China ====

Indian PM Narendra Modi and Chinese leader Xi Jinping held their first formal bilateral meeting in five years, since the deadly clash between militaries of the two nations in 2020. The leaders declared they have reached a deal resolving a four-year stand-off, following by complete disengagement of troops. President Xi emphasized the importance of the two ancient civilizations in the global south, stating India-China relations will set an example for other emerging nations. 
Modi stated that sustaining steady development of India–China relations is crucial for both nations and their populations, impacting the welfare and future of 2.8 billion individuals, and is also significant for regional and global peace and stability. China and India regard this meeting as constructive and significant, agreeing to approach China-India ties from a strategic and long-term perspective to prevent individual issues from impacting the overall relationship between the two nations.


==== India-Iran ====

Indian PM Narendra Modi and Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian held bilateral meetings discussing continuation of Chabahar Port, the International North-South Transport Corridor, reconstruction of Afghanistan, economic and trade linkages to Central Asia, and minimising Israeli–Palestinian conflict.
President Pezeshkian accepted the invitation to visit India offered by India.


==== Russia-South Africa ====
South African President Cyril Ramaphosa held bilateral meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin where he called Russia a "valued ally" for its support during apartheid.


== Participating leaders ==


=== In-person ===

Indian prime minister Modi and South African president Ramaphosa chose to attend the BRICs summit instead of the 2024 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, which was held the same week in Samoa. The Independent observed that this is a sign the two Commonwealth of Nations states "place greater weight on maintaining relations with China and Russia than on the more diffuse attractions of CHOGM".


=== Online ===
Two days before the start of the summit, Brazilian president Lula da Silva announced that he would not be attending in person due to a minor brain hemorrhage following a fall. However, he announced he would participate via videoconferencing. Foreign minister Mauro Vieira led the Brazilian delegation in place of da Silva. 


== Host invited guests ==

Miguel Díaz-Canel, First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba, was invited to the summit but stayed in Cuba due to the 2024 Cuba blackout. Aleksandar Vučić, president of Serbia, could not attend due to a conflicting visit from European Union representatives to Serbia. Both Cuba and Serbia sent representatives to the summit in place of their respective heads of state.


=== Other attendees ===


== Controversy ==

The summit sparked significant controversy, particularly surrounding UN Secretary-General António Guterres’s meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Critics, including political scientist Alexander J. Motyl in his article published on The Hill, argue that Guterres’s cordial interaction with Putin, whom the International Criminal Court has charged with war crimes, undermines the moral authority of the United Nations. Motyl and others contend that Guterres’s actions implicitly endorse Putin's aggression in Ukraine, weakening both the UN’s credibility and its position on global justice. Ukrainian journalist Ihor Petrenko echoes this sentiment, condemning Guterres for failing to challenge Putin’s dismissive rhetoric regarding the war. In contrast, scholars like Bahauddin Foizee defend Guterres's engagement with controversial leaders as necessary for maintaining diplomatic channels and fostering peace.  Foizee suggests that excluding Russia from international discussions could hinder the UN's broader peace efforts. Meanwhile, Lithuanian leaders, including Prime Minister Ingrida Šimonytė and Foreign Minister Gabrielius Landsbergis, criticized Guterres for perceived moral inconsistency, noting his attendance at the BRICS summit with Putin and Belarusian President Lukashenko despite not attending a Ukraine-focused peace summit in Switzerland earlier. This, they argued, damages Guterres credibility as an impartial mediator. This debate highlights the complex balance between moral leadership and pragmatic diplomacy in a divided global landscape.


== See also ==
2023 Russia–Africa Summit
2024 G20 Rio de Janeiro summit


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
"BRICS summit: Key takeaways from the Kazan declaration". Reuters. 24 October 2024.

The 2025 BRICS summit was the seventeenth annual BRICS summit, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.


== Background ==

The BRICS cooperation mechanism was launched in 2006, initially comprising Brazil, Russia, India, and China; South Africa joined in 2011. This is the first BRICS summit to feature Indonesia after being admitted on 8 January 2025.
Between 28 and 29 April 2025, the foreign ministers of BRICS member states met in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, ahead of the leaders' summit. Although the ministers failed to release a joint communique, they voiced concern over the rise of protectionist trade practices under the Trump administration in the United States. Chinese leader Xi Jinping did not attend the summit for the first time since succeeding Hu Jintao as CCP General Secretary in 2012.  Russian President Vladimir Putin attended the meeting only virtually due to an arrest warrant from the International Criminal Court for war crimes during the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
As of July 2025, the BRICS grouping accounts for over 45% of global GDP (nominal) and over 50% at PPP, represents more than half of the world's population, and controls significant shares of global energy reserves, industrial capacity, and critical mineral resources.


== Preparations ==
From 22 to 24 October 2024, the 16th BRICS Leaders Summit was held in Kazan, Russia. China expressed its full support for Brazil's presidency of BRICS in 2025 and for hosting the 17th BRICS Leaders Summit in Brazil. Starting 1 January 2025, Brazil officially assumed the BRICS chairmanship for 2025. The Brazilian Presidential Office released a statement emphasizing that Brazil's presidency would focus on strengthening cooperation among Global South countries and promoting reforms in global governance.
On 15 February, Brazilian Foreign Minister Mauro Vieira officially announced that the 17th BRICS Leaders Summit will take place on 6 and 7 July in Rio de Janeiro. On 13 May, a joint declaration between the People's Republic of China and the Federative Republic of Brazil was issued, titled "On Strengthening the China-Brazil Community of Shared Destiny for a Fairer World and a More Sustainable Planet, and Jointly Upholding Multilateralism." It reiterated China's support for Brazil's BRICS presidency in 2025 and the successful hosting of the 17th BRICS Leaders Summit. Both sides committed to deepening pragmatic cooperation in various fields under the BRICS framework.

On 25 and 26 February 2025, the first meeting of the BRICS Coordinators for 2025 was held in Brasília. Brazil proposed six priority agenda items for the 2025 Leaders Summit. These priorities are: cooperation in global health; trade, investment, and financial cooperation; cooperation on climate change response; governance of artificial intelligence; reform of the global security system; and BRICS institutional development. In March 2025, the Brazilian government released information confirming that key topics for the summit will include local currency settlement, global governance reform, poverty reduction, and AI governance.


== Meetings ==
On the morning of 6 July 2025, the two-day 17th BRICS Leaders Summit officially opened in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The summit was held under the theme “Strengthening Global South Cooperation and Promoting a More Inclusive and Sustainable Global Governance”, focusing on six major agenda items. These included global health, trade, investment and development financing, climate change response, governance of artificial intelligence, reform of the global security architecture, and the institutional development of the BRICS mechanism.
On 6 July, Premier of China Li Qiang attended the first phase of the summit in Rio de Janeiro, delivering a speech on “Peace and Security, and Global Governance Reform.” Leaders from the BRICS member countries participated in the meeting, which was chaired by Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.

On 6 July 2025, the declaration reaffirmed the BRICS commitment to the BRICS spirit and stated that, building on previous summit achievements, cooperation would be further enhanced under the expanded BRICS framework. The focus will be on three pillars: political and security, economic and financial, and cultural and people-to-people exchanges. The declaration also announced that India will assume the BRICS rotating chairmanship in 2026 and host the 18th BRICS Leaders Summit.
On 7 July 2025, the BRICS leaders adopted a declaration on the global governance of artificial intelligence (AI). The declaration expressed the desire to promote the establishment of international principles for the development and application of AI technologies that are inclusive, sustainable, and respect human rights. The BRICS leaders also passed a declaration calling on the United Nations to take the lead in formulating global rules for AI, emphasizing that this rapidly evolving technology must not deepen inequalities between developed and developing countries. The document described AI as a “unique opportunity” to drive inclusive growth, innovation, and sustainability, while warning that without fair governance, it could exacerbate the “digital divide.” The Leaders also discussed the role of digital media cooperation and the importance of public communication in strengthening BRICS visibility globally. The summit underscored the importance of enhancing information exchange and cultural dialogue through joint media and education projects.


== Participating leaders ==


=== Other Guests ===
Other Guests from International Organizations, External Engagement Countries, and Partner Countries:


== See also ==
2024 G20 Rio de Janeiro summit


== References ==

The 18th BRICS Summit is an upcoming international summit of the BRICS nations, scheduled to be hosted by India in 2026 as part of its BRICS chairmanship.


== Background ==
BRICS is an intergovernmental organization comprising Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, and additional member states admitted in recent years. The BRICS summit is held annually, with the chairmanship rotating among member countries.
Between 14 and 15 May 2026, the foreign ministers of BRICS member states met in Delhi, India, ahead of the leaders' summit.


== Indian presidency ==
India assumed the BRICS chairmanship on 1 January 2026, succeeding Brazil, which hosted the 17th BRICS Summit in 2025. As chair, India is responsible for organizing the 18th BRICS Summit and associated ministerial and working-group meetings.


== Logo and official website ==
The Government of India launched the official logo and website for the BRICS 2026 presidency, on 13 January 2026, marking the formal commencement of preparations for the summit.


== See also ==
BRICS
17th BRICS Summit


== References ==

The eighteenth summit of 'South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation' (SAARC) was held in Kathmandu, the capital of Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal during 26–27 November 2014. The theme of the summit was Deeper Integration for Peace and Prosperity, focused on enhancing connectivity between the member states for easier transit-transport across the region. Sushil Koirala, the then Nepalese prime minister, was the main host of the event which took place in Rastriya Sabha Griha  The summit took place after an interval of three years as the previous summit was held in 2011 in Maldives.


== Background ==
On 26 May 2014, head of state/head of government of all SAARC nations attended the Swearing-in ceremony of Narendra Modi in New Delhi and the following day they have held high level discussion with the newly appointed Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi which was dubbed as the mini SAARC summit in the media. There it was agreed to revitalize the SAARC initiative and a summit was agreed upon in Nepal at the earliest. Started on November 26, the two-day SAARC Summit was the 18th session of the multilateral organisation. times of India


== Participants ==
The following heads of state/heads of government of the eight member countries participated in the summit in Kathmandu.


== Agenda ==
Foreign Ministers of the eight member states signed an agreement on energy cooperation namely 'SAARC Framework Agreement for Energy Cooperation (Electricity)' in the presence of their heads of state and government during the concluding ceremony of the 18th SAARC Summit on 27 November. Although Pakistan stalled, citing insufficient internal preparations, signing of two other agreements on Vehicular Traffic and Railways respectively. Although Nepalese Prime Minister Sushil Koirala, current SAARC Chair, expressed his hope that the 'Regulation of Passenger and Cargo Vehicular Traffic amongst SAARC Member States', and 'SAARC Regional Agreement on Railways' would be signed later after the Transport Ministers of these countries reviewed them. It was also decided that Pakistan will host the next summit in 2016.
The India-Pakistan stand-off on the first day threatened to jeopardize the entire summit process as Pakistan seemed to be in the mood to block every Indian led proposal. But the next day things have changed when the two prime ministers met privately at the retreat session which led to Pakistan agreeing one out of three proposed agreements and they also met and shook hands publicly during the closing ceremony and this 'transient peace' in the relation was believed to brokered by the Nepalese side as a face-saving measure for the Kathmandu summit.
China, which holds an observer status in the group, was represented by Vice Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin seen actively promoting a more active role for itself in the region including infrastructure funding through its proposed 'Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank' (AIIB) and extending its ambitious Maritime Silk Road project to South Asian nations. Pakistan, China's all weather friend, also vouched for a more participatory role for the observer nations in the summit process, indirectly advocating for a more Chinese involvement. Although no such proposal was accepted because of India's reservation.


== Aftermath ==

With the ongoing cold relationships between India and Pakistan, the formal handshake between the prime ministers from both the countries caught a lot of attention and was applauded by everyone in the Summit Hall. In this way the 18th SAARC summit was over


== Gallery of participating leaders ==


== See also ==

List of SAARC summits
Declaration of 18th SAARC Summit
SAARC satellite


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website

The 1936 Summer Olympics (German: Olympische Sommerspiele 1936), officially the Games of the XI Olympiad (German: Spiele der XI. Olympiade) and branded as Berlin 1936, were an international multi-sport event held from 1 to 16 August 1936 in Berlin, Germany. Berlin won the right to host the Games over Barcelona at the 29th IOC Session in 1931. The 1936 Games were the second and last occasion on which the International Olympic Committee (IOC) chose a host by a ballot in which the bidding cities themselves could vote; later rules barred cities that hosted the vote from being selected.
The Games had been awarded to Germany during the Weimar Republic, but by 1936 the country was governed by the Nazi regime, and Adolf Hitler's government treated the Olympics as an opportunity for propaganda. To project an image of a peaceful, tolerant Germany, the authorities temporarily removed antisemitic signage and softened the most visible forms of persecution for the duration of the Games. At the same time, the German Olympic authorities barred nearly all Jewish and Romani athletes from the national team; the fencer Helene Mayer, who had one Jewish parent, was the only such athlete to represent Germany. A movement to boycott or relocate the Games developed in several countries—Czechoslovakia, France, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States—but it ultimately failed. Forty-nine nations competed, the largest number at any Olympics to that point.
These were the first Games to be televised and the first to feature a torch relay carrying the Olympic flame from Olympia to the host city—a ceremony devised for Berlin that became a permanent Olympic tradition. The filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl recorded the Games for her two-part film Olympia, which pioneered techniques still used in sports cinematography.
Jesse Owens of the United States won four gold medals in the sprint and long jump events, and became the most successful athlete to compete in Berlin, while Germany was the most successful country overall with 101 medals (38 of them gold); the United States placed a distant second with 57 medals. These were the final Olympic Games under the IOC presidency of Henri de Baillet-Latour. For the next 12 years, no Olympic Games were held due to the immense world disruption caused by the Second World War. The next Olympic Games were held in 1948 (the Winter Games in St. Moritz, Switzerland, and then the Summer Games in London, England).


== Host city selection ==
At the 28th IOC Session in Berlin in May 1930, fourteen cities indicated an intention to bid for the 1936 Summer Olympics. By the 29th Session, held in Barcelona in April 1931, only Barcelona and Berlin remained in contention; the other cities—Alexandria, Budapest, Buenos Aires, Cologne, Dublin, Frankfurt, Helsinki, Lausanne, Montevideo, Nuremberg, Rio de Janeiro, and Rome—had withdrawn. Several of these cities later hosted the Games: Helsinki in 1952, Rome in 1960, Barcelona in 1992 and Rio de Janeiro in 2016.
The 1936 Games were the first for which the host was decided by a vote of each individual IOC member rather than by the assembled Session alone. The deadline for ballots was 13 May 1931, two weeks after the Barcelona Session. Of 67 voting members, 19 cast ballots during the Session and 40 by post to the IOC headquarters in Lausanne; eight abstained. The result was 43 votes for Berlin and 16 for Barcelona. Barcelona's prospects were probably weakened by the political uncertainty that followed the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic days before the Session.
After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933 and the regime's early antisemitic measures, some IOC members privately discussed moving the Games, and the US Olympic Association briefly suggested transferring them to Rome. Hitler's government gave assurances that Jewish athletes would not be excluded from the German team, and the proposal was not seriously pursued.


== Background and political context ==
Awarded to Berlin in 1931 under the Weimar Republic, the Games took on a new character after the Nazi takeover of January 1933, as the regime grasped their value as international propaganda.


=== Nazi propaganda and the "beautification" of Berlin ===

Hitler regarded the Games as a chance to promote his government and its ideology of Aryan supremacy. The official Nazi paper, the Völkischer Beobachter, had argued in the strongest terms that Jewish and black athletes should be barred from the Olympics. As the Games approached, however, the regime worked to soften Germany's international image: signs reading "Jews not welcome" (German: Juden unerwünscht) were taken down from public places for the duration, and overt antisemitic agitation was muted.

The effort extended to the removal of people the regime considered undesirable. In July 1936 the Ministry of the Interior authorised Berlin's police to detain the city's Romani and confine them in a special camp at Marzahn, on the city's outskirts. Five months before the opening ceremony, in March 1936, Germany had remilitarised the Rhineland in breach of the Treaty of Versailles, heightening international tension in the months before the Games.


=== Exclusion of Jewish and Roma athletes ===

In line with Nazi directives, the German Olympic Committee effectively barred German athletes who were Jewish or Roma, or of such ancestry, from competing. The most prominent excluded athlete was the high jumper Gretel Bergmann, who was dropped from the team shortly after equalling the German record of 1.60 m in June 1936. Others kept off the team included the record-holding track-and-field athlete Lilli Henoch, the tennis player Daniel Prenn, the boxer Erich Seelig and the Sinti boxer Johann Trollmann. Helene Mayer—already an Olympic champion who had emigrated to the United States—returned to fence for Germany and won a silver medal, the only athlete of Jewish descent on the German team, a token inclusion intended to deflect foreign criticism.
The exclusions also reached the organisers. Theodor Lewald, president of the German Olympic Committee, had a Jewish grandparent and was sidelined from a leading role, while Hauptmann Wolfgang Fürstner, who had overseen construction of the Olympic Village, was reclassified as a Jew under the Nuremberg Laws and demoted shortly before the Games; he took his own life days after they ended.


== Organisation and preparation ==

Overall responsibility for the Games lay with Hans von Tschammer und Osten, the Reichssportführer, though the detailed organisation was handled by Theodor Lewald and Carl Diem, the former president and secretary of Germany's Olympic sports body; Diem, as secretary-general of the organising committee, was the chief promoter of the torch relay from Olympia to Berlin. The Games' emblem, designed by the artist Johannes Boehland, originally combined the Olympic rings, the German eagle and the Brandenburg Gate; on Lewald's suggestion its lower part was opened out into the shape of a bell, and the resulting Olympic Bell, inscribed with the motto 'I call the youth of the world', became one of the Games' lasting symbols.


=== Torch relay ===

Although the Olympic flame had been reintroduced at the 1928 Summer Olympics, Berlin staged the first torch relay, carrying a flame kindled at Olympia in Greece to the host city through seven countries. The concept, organised by Diem, established the modern convention later used at every Games, and Riefenstahl incorporated the relay into Olympia.


=== Olympic Village ===

The Olympic Village lay at Elstal in Wustermark, about 30 km west of central Berlin, and comprised low dormitories, a large "Dining Hall of the Nations", training facilities and a swimming hall. After the Games the site was absorbed by the Wehrmacht and later used by Soviet forces as a military camp; parts of it, including the dormitory used by Jesse Owens, have been restored more recently.


=== Venues ===

Twenty-two venues were used, most of them in the purpose-built Reichssportfeld complex, which had been planned for the cancelled 1916 Summer Olympics and was completed in 1934–36. The centrepiece Olympic Stadium seated about 100,000; sailing was held in the Bay of Kiel, later reused for the 1972 Summer Olympics.


=== Broadcasting and film ===

The Games were the first to be carried on live television. Using Telefunken equipment, the German Post Office transmitted more than 70 hours of black-and-white coverage to public viewing rooms in Berlin and Potsdam, where more than 162,000 people in all followed the competitions on screens outside the stadium. Radio carried the Games more widely still, in 28 languages across some 2,500 broadcasts. The Games were also an early showcase for colour photography, using Germany's newly developed Agfacolor film. The filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl recorded the Games for her two-part documentary Olympia, released in 1938.


=== Costs ===
The Games were among the most lavish staged to that point, and most of the spending lay well outside the organising committee's own accounts. From 1933 the Reich Ministry of the Interior directed a vast building programme that the regime folded into its public-works and job-creation schemes, and historians have treated this state investment—rather than ticket income—as the truer measure of what the Games cost. Its centrepiece, the new Olympic Stadium, was built in barely two years at a cost of around 42 million Reichsmark; with the wider Reichssportfeld, the Olympic Village and new transport links, the state's outlay dwarfed the committee's budget. Hitler also prized the Games as a way to earn scarce foreign currency at a time of dwindling German reserves, later claiming they had brought in large sums. The committee's own books were comparatively modest: ticket sales brought in about 7.5 million RM and an operating profit of over one million RM. The city of Berlin reported costs of about 16.5 million RM, while the national government's total spending was never published in full and has been estimated at around US$30 million.


== The Games ==
The sporting programme ran from 1 to 16 August 1936 and was framed by elaborate opening and closing ceremonies.


=== Opening ceremony ===

The opening ceremony took place at the Olympic Stadium on 1 August 1936. The airship Hindenburg flew over the stadium trailing the Olympic flag. After Hitler's arrival the parade of nations proceeded, with Greece first and the host nation last; some teams gave the Nazi salute or the similar Olympic salute as they passed Hitler's box, with French Olympians giving a Roman salute, while the United States and a few others did not. The Greek team that led the parade was headed by Spyridon Louis, winner of the marathon at the first modern Olympics in 1896, who presented Hitler with an olive branch from Olympia. Hitler then declared the Games open; in keeping with Olympic protocol his part was confined to the set formula—"I proclaim the Games of Berlin, celebrating the eleventh Olympiad of the modern era, to be open"—his only public statement during the Games. A torch-bearer then ran into the arena to light the cauldron, and thousands of pigeons were released. During the ceremony the Olympic Hymn—specially composed by Richard Strauss, who conducted it himself—received its première; Strauss had taken the commission only after the writer Gerhart Hauptmann failed to supply a text, and he privately dismissed the piece even as he led it.


=== Sports ===

The programme comprised 129 events in 25 disciplines across 19 sports. Basketball, canoeing and handball made their Olympic debuts; handball would not return until the 1972 Summer Olympics, while polo made its fifth and final Olympic appearance. Baseball and gliding were held as demonstration sports, and art competitions awarded medals, as did feats of alpinism and aeronautics recognised at the closing ceremony.
National strengths were pronounced across the individual sports. The host nation owed its place atop the medal table chiefly to gymnastics, rowing and the equestrian events, in which German riders won all six golds. Athletics, the largest sport, was dominated by the United States, whose men won twelve track-and-field golds; Helen Stephens took two of the six women's events. In the pool the men's programme became a duel between the US and Japan, while Rie Mastenbroek of the Netherlands, the outstanding swimmer of the Games, led Dutch dominance of the women's events; US women instead won both diving titles. France's Robert Charpentier won three cycling golds, and the fencing titles fell mainly to Italy and Hungary.
The team events produced their own milestones. The United States won the first Olympic basketball tournament, beating Canada 19–8 in a final played outdoors on a rain-soaked clay court, with the game's inventor James Naismith on hand to present the medals. Germany won the inaugural field handball competition, an eleven-a-side outdoor game, and Hungary took the water polo, a sport it would go on to dominate. Italy won the football and India a third successive hockey gold, while polo, won by Argentina, was contested for the last time.


=== Notable achievements ===

The outstanding individual performer was Jesse Owens of the United States, who won gold in the 100 m, 200 m, long jump, and 4×100 m relay. In the long jump his German rival Luz Long offered him advice after he nearly failed to qualify, and the two were publicly cordial. Mack Robinson, brother of Jackie Robinson, took 200 m silver behind Owens. In the 800 m, John Woodruff won gold after deliberately slowing to free himself when boxed in. Jack Lovelock of New Zealand won the 1500 m in a world-record 3:47.8. In the decathlon, Glenn Morris of the United States set a world record of 7,900 points to lead an American medal sweep, and Ondina Valla took the 80 m hurdles to become the first Italian woman to win an Olympic title, in a final so close that the first four finishers were given the same time. In the pole vault, the Japanese team-mates Shuhei Nishida and Sueo Ōe tied for second and refused to jump off against each other; officials awarded the silver to Nishida and the bronze to Ōe, and on returning home the pair had the medals cut in half and rejoined so that each kept a half-silver, half-bronze "medal of friendship".
German athletes were strong in several sports, sweeping all six equestrian golds and, in the gymnasts Konrad Frey and Alfred Schwarzmann, producing two triple gold medallists. The equestrian team eventing title owed much to Konrad von Wangenheim, who finished the cross-country phase despite breaking his collarbone in a fall and returned the next day—his arm in a sling—to complete the jumping after he and his horse fell again. Rie Mastenbroek of the Netherlands won three swimming golds and a silver, and the Estonian Kristjan Palusalu became the only wrestler to win both the freestyle and Greco-Roman heavyweight titles at a single Games. The Egyptian weightlifter Khadr El Touni won the middleweight gold with a world-record total, beating the German silver medallist by a wide margin.
In the football tournament, Italy—coached by Vittorio Pozzo between their two FIFA World Cup wins—took gold; the result was claimed by supporters of Benito Mussolini as a vindication of fascism. Peru had beaten Austria 4–2 after extra time amid a disputed pitch invasion, but the IOC ordered a replay behind closed doors; Peru refused and withdrew from the Games, as did Colombia in sympathy. On its Olympic football debut, Japan came from two goals down to beat the favoured Swedes 3–2 before being eliminated by Italy in the next round. India won its third consecutive hockey gold, defeating Germany 8–1 in the final. In the marathon, the Korean runners Sohn Kee-chung and Nam Sung-yong won gold and bronze while competing for Japan, which then ruled Korea. On the podium Sohn bowed his head during the Japanese anthem and held his victor's oak seedling over the Japanese emblem on his shirt (some accounts say a laurel wreath); a Korean newspaper, the Dong-a Ilbo, had eight of its staff jailed and was suspended for some nine months after it published a photograph with the flag erased from his chest. More than half a century later, Sohn carried the Olympic flame into the stadium at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul. The United States eight, from the University of Washington, won the rowing title with a come-from-behind final, later recounted in The Boys in the Boat. The 13-year-old US Marjorie Gestring won the 3 m springboard, and Betty Robinson, the 1928 100 m champion who had nearly died in a 1931 plane crash, returned to win gold in the 4×100 m relay.
The American Jewish sprinters Marty Glickman and Sam Stoller were dropped from the 4×100 m relay on the morning of the race in favour of Owens and Ralph Metcalfe; the decision has been widely attributed to a wish not to embarrass the German hosts, though the reasons remain disputed.
The German wrestler Werner Seelenbinder, a committed communist, is said to have intended to refuse the Nazi salute on the victory podium, but he finished fourth in the Greco-Roman light-heavyweight class and so was never in line for a medal ceremony; active in the anti-Nazi resistance, he was arrested in 1942 and executed in 1944.


=== Closing ceremony ===
The Games closed on the evening of 16 August 1936 before a crowd of more than 100,000 in the Olympic Stadium. Historians have described the closing as more sombre and militaristic than the opening, marked by columns of soldiers and fireworks. As the ceremony reached its climax, searchlights ringed the arena to form a "dome of light" overhead, the five-ringed Olympic flag was slowly lowered, and the flame that had burned since 1 August was extinguished as the spectators joined in a closing choral hymn.
IOC president Henri de Baillet-Latour formally declared the Games closed. These were the last Olympics of his presidency and, as it proved, the last for twelve years; the 1940 Games had already been awarded to Tokyo at the IOC session held in Berlin on 31 July 1936, before the Olympics even opened.
Two unusual special awards were also recognised in connection with the closing. An Olympic gold for alpinism went to the mountaineers Günter and Hettie Dyhrenfurth for their Himalayan expeditions, and the only Olympic gold ever awarded for aeronautics went to the Swiss pilot Hermann Schreiber for the first glider flight across the Alps; neither prize was contested again.


== Participating nations ==

Forty-nine nations competed, up from 37 in 1932. Five made their first Olympic appearance: Afghanistan, Bermuda, Bolivia, Costa Rica and Liechtenstein. Several nations returned after missing 1932, while Ireland and Spain competed in 1932 but were absent from Berlin. Sources give the number of participants differently, largely because of how the art competitions are counted. The International Olympic Committee gives the figure of 3,963 athletes—3,632 men and 331 women—in the sporting events. The 1936 programme, however, also awarded medals in five art categories (architecture, literature, music, painting and sculpture) and in alpinism and aeronautics; counting the architects, writers, composers, painters and sculptors who entered the art competitions, the database Olympedia records 4,483 participants across all 31 medal disciplines.


== Medal table ==

The twelve nations that won the most medals at the 1936 Games.

  *   Host nation (Germany)


=== Art competitions ===

As at every Games from 1912 to 1948, medals were also awarded in art competitions for works inspired by sport. The 1936 edition was the largest the Olympics ever staged, with fifteen events across five categories—architecture, literature, music, painting and sculpture—and the entries were shown in an exhibition on the Kaiserdamm that drew some 70,000 visitors. A novelty that year was that the prize-winning musical works were performed: the German composer Werner Egk took the orchestral gold for his Olympic Festive Music. Other golds went to the architect Werner March and his brother Walter for their design of the Reichssportfeld, to the Finnish writer Urho Karhumäki for the novel Avoveteen, to the Swiss graphic artist Alex Diggelmann for a sports poster, and to the Italian sculptor Farpi Vignoli for The Sulky Driver. With many French and British artists staying away, German entrants dominated, winning twelve of the thirty-two medals and five of the nine golds; the judges withheld medals entirely in three events. The art competitions were dropped after 1948; the IOC's currently recognizes them as official and its database give Germany a combined total of 101 medals for the 1936 Games, which includes 12 medals won in art competitions.


== Boycott debate ==
Prior to and during the Games, there was considerable debate outside Germany over whether the competition should be allowed or discontinued. A number of campaigns to boycott or relocate the Games emerged in the United Kingdom, France, Sweden, Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, and the United States. The most consequential debate took place in the United States. 
The protests were ultimately unsuccessful; forty-nine teams from around the world participated in the 1936 Games, the largest number of participating nations of any Olympics to that point.


=== United States ===

Traditionally, the US sent one of the largest teams to the Olympics, and there was a considerable debate over whether the nation should participate in the 1936 Games. Americans Milton Green and Norman Cahners refused to attend, and American Jewish organizations, such as the American Jewish Congress and the Jewish Labor Committee, supported a boycott. Judge Jeremiah T. Mahoney, president of the Amateur Athletic Union (AAU), contested that racial discrimination was a violation of Olympic rules and that participation in the Games was amount to an indirect endorsement of the Third Reich. Avery Brundage, then of the American Olympic Committee, opposed the boycott, maintaining that politics had no place in sport and that the Olympic movement would be undermined if nations restricted participation by race or creed. Brundage would be later accused of being a Soviet sympathizer for his controversial stance on the Soviet sports system that allowed them to circumvent the amateur rules.
Most African-American newspapers supported participation in the Olympics. The Philadelphia Tribune and the Chicago Defender both agreed that black victories would undermine Nazi views of Aryan supremacy and spark renewed African-American pride. Eventually, Brundage won the debate, convincing the Amateur Athletic Union to close a vote in favor of sending an American team to the Berlin Olympics. Mahoney's efforts to incite a boycott of the Olympic games in the United States failed, although some athletes like Harvard University track star Milton Green chose to sit at home. US President Franklin Roosevelt and his administration did not become involved in the debate, due to a tradition of allowing the Olympic Committee to operate independently of government influence. Several American diplomats including William E. Dodd, the American ambassador to Berlin, and George Messersmith, head of the US legation in Vienna, opposed the decision to participate in the games. The Jewish Labour Committee staged a "World Labour Athletic Carnival" in New York during as an alternative sporting event.


=== Spain ===

The Spanish government led by the newly elected left-wing Popular Front boycotted the Games and the Government of Catalonia organized the People's Olympiad as a parallel event in Barcelona. Some 6,000 athletes from 49 countries registered. However, the People's Olympiad was aborted because of the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War just one day before the event was due to start.


=== Soviet Union ===
The Soviet Union had not participated in international sporting events since the 1920 Summer Olympics. The Soviet government was not invited to the 1920 Games, with the Russian Civil War still raging, and they did not participate in the 1924 Summer Olympics and forward on ideological grounds. Instead, through the auspices of the Red Sport International, it had participated in a left-wing workers' alternative, the Spartakiad, since 1928. The USSR had intended to attend the People's Olympiad in Barcelona until it was cancelled; the Soviets did attend the Spartakiad-sponsored 1937 Workers' Summer Olympiad in Antwerp, Belgium. The Soviet Union started competing in the Olympics in 1952, when Joseph Stalin realized that they could use the event to fulfil their political and ideological agenda.


=== Other countries ===
In France, the Jewish fencer Albert Wolff qualified for the national team but withdrew on principle. The Maccabi World Union declined an invitation on behalf of Mandatory Palestine, and two Turkish fencers, Halet Çambel and Suat Fetgeri Aşani—among the first Muslim women to compete at the Olympics—reportedly refused an introduction to Hitler.


== Legacy and aftermath ==
Historians widely regard the Berlin Games as a major propaganda success for the Nazi regime, though they differ over how far that success reached. The US Holocaust Memorial Museum describes them as "a resounding propaganda success" that projected an image of a peaceful, tolerant Germany, and notes that the forty-nine nations who took part lent the regime legitimacy in the eyes of both foreign and domestic audiences. Most contemporary press coverage was favourable; US newspapers echoed a New York Times report that the Games had put Germany "back in the fold of nations". Astute diplomats and correspondents stationed in Germany were less easily fooled, but many ordinary visitors and much of the foreign media came away impressed.


=== Assessment as propaganda ===

The scale of that success is debated. Richard D. Mandell, in the first major English-language study, The Nazi Olympics (1971), argued that the regime's unprecedented mass pageantry overwhelmed the critical judgement of visiting journalists, businessmen and diplomats. David Clay Large likewise counts the Games among the regime's greatest propaganda achievements, but draws a distinction: their effect on Germany's international standing was limited, whereas at home they helped the still-insecure Hitler consolidate his power—in Large's view the most important consequence of the Games. Other historians stress that the result turned on the failure of the boycott movement and on the willingness of officials to accept the regime's assurances, rather than on propaganda alone.
Owens's four gold medals became the most enduring popular memory of the Games and were widely seen as a rebuke to Nazi racial theory, though Germany still finished well clear at the top of the medal table. The persistent story that Hitler publicly snubbed Owens is not supported by the evidence: on the first day Hitler congratulated several German and Finnish victors but left the stadium before the African-American high jumper Cornelius Johnson received his gold, after which IOC president Henri de Baillet-Latour told him to greet all medalists or none; Hitler thereafter received none publicly, and Owens, who won the first of his titles the following day, was never in line to be greeted. Owens said he had been treated cordially in Germany and reserved his bitterness for the segregation he faced on returning home, noting that President Franklin D. Roosevelt neither received nor congratulated him.


=== Aftermath ===
The image of a tolerant Germany did not outlast the Games. Once the foreign visitors had left, anti-Jewish measures resumed and persecution intensified, leading to the Kristallnacht pogrom of November 1938 and, in September 1939, the outbreak of the Second World War. Several 1936 Olympians were later murdered in the Holocaust, among them the Polish competitors Roman Kantor and Ilia Szrajbman, both killed at Majdanek. The war forced the cancellation of the 1940 and 1944 Games, and the Olympics did not resume until London 1948.


=== Cultural legacy ===
The Games left a lasting cultural and sporting imprint. Leni Riefenstahl's film Olympia (1938) is regarded both as a landmark in cinema—for innovations such as underwater and slow-motion photography that influenced later sports filmmaking—and as a work of state propaganda. The torch relay and the live television coverage introduced in Berlin became permanent features of the modern Games, and the Olympic Stadium survived the war to be renovated for the 2006 FIFA World Cup final. Owens's story has since been dramatised on film, including in Race (2016). The Berlin Games are now widely cited as the archetypal example of "sportswashing"—the use of a prestigious sporting event to improve the image of an authoritarian government—and as a precedent in debates over later host selections.


== See also ==
1936 Winter Olympics
People's Olympiad


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Hilton, Christopher (2006). Hitler's Olympics: The 1936 Berlin Olympic Games. Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-4292-8.
Krüger, Arnd; Murray, William, eds. (2003). The Nazi Olympics: Sport, Politics, and Appeasement in the 1930s. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02815-1.
Walters, Guy (2006). Berlin Games: How the Nazis Stole the Olympic Dream. William Morrow. ISBN 978-0-06-087412-4.


== External links ==
Berlin 1936 at Olympics.com
1936 Summer Olympics at Olympedia
The Nazi Olympics: Berlin 1936 at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
"Official Report, Volume 1". LA84 Foundation Digital Library.

General elections were held in India between 24 February and 14 March 1957, the second elections to the Lok Sabha after independence. Elections to several state legislatures were held simultaneously.
Under the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru, the Indian National Congress easily won a second term in power, taking 371 of the 494 seats. They gained an extra seven seats (the size of the Lok Sabha had been increased by five) and their vote share increased from 45% to 48%. The INC received nearly five times more votes than the Communist Party, the second largest party. In addition, 19% of the vote and 42 seats went to independent candidates, the highest of any Indian general election.


== Electoral system ==
There were 494 seats elected using first past the post voting. Out of the 403 constituencies, 91 elected two members, while the remaining 312 elected a single member. The multi-seat constituencies were abolished before the next election.
The elections were overseen by Sukumar Sen, the Chief Election Commissioner, who used the existing election infrastructure to reduce costs and improve efficiency. Historian Ramachandra Guha wrote "this general election cost the exchequer Rs45 million less than the previous one. The prudent Sen had safely stored the 3.5 million ballot boxes the first time round and only half a million additional ones were required."


== Conduct ==
The first instance of booth capturing in India was recorded in 1957 in the General Elections of that year in Rachiyahi, in Begusarai's Matihani assembly seat.


== Results ==


=== Results by state ===


==== Andhra Pradesh ====


==== Assam ====


==== Bihar ====


==== Bombay ====


==== Kerala ====


==== Madhya Pradesh ====


==== Madras ====


==== Mysore ====


==== Orissa ====


==== Punjab ====


==== Rajasthan ====


==== Uttar Pradesh ====


==== West Bengal ====


=== Women performance in elections ===
Based on the published data from the Election Commission of India (ECI) website.


==== Participation ====


== See also ==
List of members of the 2nd Lok Sabha
Election Commission of India
Booth capturing
Category:1957 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==

General elections were held in India between 19 and 25 February 1962 to elect members of the third Lok Sabha. Unlike the previous two elections, each constituency elected a single member.
Jawaharlal Nehru won another landslide victory in his third and final election campaign. The Indian National Congress received 44.7% of the vote and won 361 of the 494 elected seats. This was only slightly lower than in the previous two elections and they still held over 70% of the seats in the Lok Sabha.


== Results ==


=== State wise ===


==== Andhra Pradesh ====


==== Assam ====


==== Bihar ====


==== Gujarat ====

Gujarat was formed a new state in 1961 after separation from Bombay state.


==== Madras ====


== By-elections ==
In 1963 a by-election was held for the Bilaspur Lok Sabha seat, which was at the time in Madhya Pradesh. The by-election was won by the Indian National Congress candidate Chandrabhan Singh, with 86,229 votes, against  M. L. Shukla of Jana Sangh with 54,156 votes. This by-election was needed because the original election for this seat was declared void by the Madhya Pradesh High Court, which judged that the nomination papers of one of the candidates, Bashir Ahmed Qureshi, "was improperly and illegally rejected by the Returning Officer".


== See also ==
List of members of the 3rd Lok Sabha
1962 Indian general election by state or union territory
1962 Indian presidential election


== Notes ==


== References ==

General elections were held in India between 17 and 21 February 1967 to elect 520 of the 523 members of the fourth Lok Sabha, an increase of 15 from the previous session of Lok Sabha. Elections to State Assemblies were also held simultaneously, the last general election to do so.
The incumbent Indian National Congress government retained power, albeit with a significantly reduced majority. Indira Gandhi was resworn in as the Prime Minister on 13 March.


== Background ==
By 1967 economic growth in India had slowed – the 1961–1966 Five-Year Plan gave a target of 6% annual growth, but actual growth rate was 2%. Under Lal Bahadur Shastri, the government's popularity was boosted after India prevailed in the 1965 War with Pakistan, but the war, along with the previous 1962 War with China, put a strain on the economy. Internal divisions were emerging in the Indian National Congress while its two popular leaders Jawaharlal Nehru and Lal Bahadur Shastri had both died. Indira Gandhi had succeeded Shastri as leader, but a rift had emerged between her and Deputy Prime Minister Morarji Desai, who had been her rival in the 1966 party leadership contest.


== Results ==

The INC suffered setbacks in seven states, including Gujarat where it won 11 of the 24 seats while the Swatantra Party won 12 seats; Madras State, where INC won 3 out of 39 seats and DMK won 25 seats; Orissa, where they won 6 out of 20 seats and Swatantra Party won 8 seats. Rajasthan where they won 10 out of 20 seats Swatantra Party won 8 seats, West Bengal where they won 14 out of 40, Kerala where they won only 1 out of 19. Delhi where they won 1 out of 7 while remaining 6 were won by Bharatiya Jana Sangh. The party was also ousted from power in nine states, while losing governance in Uttar Pradesh one month after the election. 


=== State wise ===


== See also ==
List of members of the 4th Lok Sabha
Category:1967 Indian general election by state or union territory


== References ==

General elections were held in India between 1 and 10 March 1971 to elect members of the fifth Lok Sabha. They were the fifth general elections since independence in 1947. Members were elected from 518 single-seat constituencies. Under the leadership of Indira Gandhi, the Indian National Congress (R) led a campaign which focused on reducing poverty and won a landslide victory, overcoming a split in the party and regaining many of the seats lost in the previous election.


== Background ==


=== Congress party split ===
During Indira Gandhi's previous term, there had been internal divisions in the Indian National Congress caused by various initiatives of her administration like nationalisation of banks, coal and steel, abolition of the privy purse and increasing closeness with the Soviet Union, steps that were considered to be too left-wing by the Congress high command consisting of centre-right leaders like Morarji Desai, K. Kamaraj, Atulya Ghosh, Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, S. K. Patil and others. In 1969 she was expelled from the party by party president S. Nijalingappa, causing a split. Most of the Congress MPs and grassroots support joined Gandhi's Indian National Congress (Requisitionists) faction, which was recognised by the Election Commission as being the successor to the previous party. 31 MPs who opposed Gandhi formed Indian National Congress (Organisation) party.


=== Minority government ===
The Second Indira Gandhi government, formed in November 1969 and dissolved in March 1971, was the first minority government in independent India. After the split, the INC(R) held 221 seats in the 523-seat parliament, 41 seats short of a majority. However, Gandhi and her cabinet remained in power by relying on support from left-wing parties like the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (26 seats), the Communist Party of India and its recently formed breakaway faction, the CPI(Marxist) (who together had 42 seats), giving the government a total of 289 seats, a comfortable majority and far more than the minimum of 262 seats required for a majority. Knowing that her minority government would eventually fall, on 27 December 1970, President V.V. Giri dissolved the Lok Sabha on the recommendation of Gandhi.


=== Opposition alliance ===
 
INC(O) formed a pre-poll alliance with Samyukta Socialist Party (SSP), Praja Socialist Party (PSP), the Swatantra Party and Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS) and several other regional parties opposed to the INC(R). They agreed to field a single joint candidate against the INC(R) candidate in every constituency in order to defeat Gandhi's party.


== Results ==
Despite the split, the ruling faction gained votes and seats to win a strong majority, while the Grand Alliance was badly trounced and lost more than half of their seats.


=== Results by state ===


=== State wise Detailed ===


== Aftermath ==
On 12 June 1975 the Allahabad High Court invalidated the result in Gandhi's constituency on the grounds of electoral malpractices. Instead of resigning, Indira Gandhi called a state of emergency, suspending democracy and outlawed political opposition. After democracy was restored in 1977, the opposition Congress faction formed a coalition of parties called the Janata Party, which inflicted the Congress's first electoral defeat.


== See also ==
List of members of the 5th Lok Sabha
1971 Indian general election by state or union territory
1969 Indian presidential election


== References ==

General elections were held in India between 16 and 20 March 1977 to elect the members of the sixth Lok Sabha. The elections took place during the Emergency period, which expired on 21 March 1977, shortly before the final results were announced. 
The elections resulted in a heavy defeat for the Indian National Congress (R), with the incumbent Prime Minister and INC(R) party leader Indira Gandhi losing her seat in Rae Bareli, while her son Sanjay lost his seat in Amethi. Morarji Desai of the Janata Party took office as the first non-Congress Prime Minister on 24 March. The call for restoration of democracy by revoking the Emergency is considered to be a major reason for the sweeping victory for the opposition Janata Alliance, At 81, Desai became the oldest man to be elected Prime Minister of India.


== Background ==
A total of 542 members were elected from single-member constituencies. These 542 constituencies remained same until 2004 Indian general elections for the 14th Lok Sabha.
The Emergency declared by the Indira Gandhi led Congress(R) government was the core issue in the 1977 elections. Civil liberties were suspended during the national emergency from 25 June 1975 to 21 March 1977 and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi assumed vast powers.
Gandhi had become unpopular for her decision and paid for it during the elections. On 18 January, Gandhi called for fresh elections and released some political prisoners. Many remained in prison until she was ousted from office and a new prime minister took over. On 20 January, four opposition parties, the Indian National Congress (Organisation), the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, the Bharatiya Lok Dal and the Praja Socialist Party, decided to fight the elections under a single banner called the Janata alliance. The alliance used the symbol allocated to Bhartiya Lok Dal as their symbol on the ballot papers.
The Janata Alliance reminded voters of the excesses and human rights violations during the Emergency, like compulsory sterilisation and imprisonment of political leaders. The Janata campaign said the elections would decide whether India would have "democracy or dictatorship." The Congress(R) looked jittery. Agriculture and Irrigation Minister Babu Jagjivan Ram quit the party in the first week of February; other notable Congress(R) stalwarts who crossed the floor with Jagjivan Ram before the election were Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna and Nandini Satpathy.


== Results ==
The elections in India's largest state Uttar Pradesh, historically a Congress(R) stronghold, turned against Gandhi. Dhanagare says the structural reasons included the emergence of a strong and united opposition, disunity and weariness within the Congress(R), an effective opposition and the failure of Gandhi in controlling the mass media, which was under censorship during the Emergency. The structural factors allowed voters to express their grievances, notably their resentment of the emergency and its authoritarian and repressive policies. One grievance often mentioned was the 'Nasbandi' (vasectomy) campaign in rural areas. The middle class also emphasised on the curbing of freedom of speech throughout the country.
Meanwhile, Congress(R) hit an all-time low in West Bengal, according to the Gangulys, because of the state-sponsored anti-Communist violence against the cadres of CPI(M) & Naxalites by the government of Siddhartha Shankar Ray, whose legitimacy was questionable, poor discipline and factionalism among Congress(R) activists as well as numerous defections that weakened the party. Opponents emphasised the issues of corruption within the Congress(R) and appealed to a deep desire by the voters for fresh leadership. The Congress(R), however, did well in southern states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. The results were mixed in the western states of Maharashtra and Gujarat, although the Janata alliance won all the seats in Mumbai.


=== Results by state/union territory ===

Notes:  

The results for presented above are party-wise, not alliance-wise.
Party abbreviations:
JNP – Janata Party
INC(R) – Indian National Congress (R)
LFT – Left Front (comprising CPI(M), CPI, RSP, and AIFB)
OTH – Others (includes parties and independents not belonging to any of the above groups)


== Lok Sabha by-elections ==


== Aftermath ==
It was not clear if Indira would accept the election results. Although she publicly claimed she would "abide" by the results, behind the scenes, she fired Military Intelligence Head Mani Mishra in favour of loyalist Kashmiri Hardayal Kaul. The INC(R) and senior military officers held several meetings in New Delhi, raising suspicions. Chief of the Army Staff T.N. Raina (who had only been appointed because Indira had superseded senior officers to appoint him) was invited for a discussion by Indira and Sanjay Gandhi. Sanjay reportedly told Raina "There are about 300 districts in the country. One infantry platoon is sufficient to control each district... Thus we can control India by deploying 300 platoons or about 25 infantry battalions; a mere three or four divisions. The party [the Congress], supported by paramilitary forces and the police, can deal with other administrative details." Although Indira agreed with Sanjay's plan, Raina refused to follow the plan, despite noting Sanjay's assumptions were "mathematically correct". 


== See also ==
List of members of the 6th Lok Sabha
1977 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Guha, Ramachandra. India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy (2008)  pp 491–518
Klieman, Aaron S. "Indira's India: Democracy and Crisis Government," Political Science Quarterly (1981) 96#2 pp. 241–259 in JSTOR
Roy, Ramashray; Sheth, D. L. "The 1977 Lok Sabha Election Outcome: The Salience of Changing Voter Alignments Since 1969," Political Science Review (1978), Vol. 17 Issue 3/4, pp 51–63

General elections were held in India on 24, 27 and 28 December 1984, shortly after the assassination of prime minister, Indira Gandhi. Voting was delayed in Assam and Punjab until 1985 due to ongoing insurgency. 
The elections were a landslide victory for the Indian National Congress (Indira) of Rajiv Gandhi (son of Indira Gandhi), which won 404 of the 514 seats elected in 1984 and a further 10 in the delayed elections. The Telugu Desam Party of N. T. Rama Rao, a regional political party from the state of Andhra Pradesh, was the second largest party, winning 30 seats, thus achieving the distinction of becoming the first regional party to become a national opposition party. AIADMK of Tamil Nadu contested the election in alliance with the INC (I), and won 12 seats. 
Voting was held immediately after the assassination of Indira Gandhi and the 1984 anti-Sikh riots in November. Congress (Indira) received significant support due to an outpouring of public grief at Gandhi's death. Voting was delayed in the Sikh-majority state of Punjab, while the Assam movement and sporadic violence in Mizoram by the Mizo National Front as a part of its uprising against the government saw voting being delayed in these states.   
The 1984 elections were the last in which a single party won a majority of seats until 2014, and the only time to date in which a party won more than 400 seats.


== Results ==


=== Delayed elections in Assam and Punjab ===

The elections in Punjab were held in September 1985 after the signing of the Rajiv–Longowal Accord between Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and Akali leader Harchand Singh Longowal on 24 July 1985. The elections were held alongside elections to the Punjab Legislative Assembly. In Assam elections were held in December 1985 after the signing of the Assam Accord in August 1985.


== Results by State/UT ==

NOTE:
The LF (Left Front) consisted of the CPI(M), CPI, RSP, and AIFB.
The results include the 1984 General Election and the delayed 1985 elections in Assam and Punjab.


== See also ==
List of members of the 8th Lok Sabha
1984 Indian general election by state or union territory


== References ==

General elections were held in India on 22 and 26 November 1989 to elect the members of the ninth Lok Sabha. The incumbent Indian National Congress (Indira) government under the premiership of Rajiv Gandhi lost its mandate, even though it was still the largest single party in the Lok Sabha. V. P. Singh, the leader of the second largest party Janata Dal (which also headed the National Front) was invited by the President of India to form the government. The government was formed with outside support from the Bharatiya Janata Party and Communist parties led by CPI(M). V. P. Singh was sworn in as the seventh Prime Minister of India on 2 December 1989.


== Background ==
The 1989 elections were held after the Lok Sabha elected in 1984 completed its five-year term. Although Rajiv Gandhi had won the 1984 elections by an unprecedented landslide (mainly due to an overwhelming outpour of popular grief for to his mother's assassination), by 1989 he was trying to fight off scandals that had marred his administration.
The Bofors scandal, Gandhi's supposed attempt at shielding Adil Shahryar, who had been involved in the 1984 Bhopal tragedy, allegations of Muslim appeasement in the wake of the Shah Bano case, rising insurgency in Assam, insurrection in Punjab, Indian involvement in the Sri Lankan civil war were just some of the problems that stared at his government. Rajiv's biggest critic was Vishwanath Pratap Singh, who held the portfolios of the finance ministry and the defence ministry in the government.
But Singh was soon sacked from the Cabinet and he then resigned from his memberships in the Congress and the Lok Sabha. He formed the Jana Morcha with Arun Nehru and Arif Mohammad Khan and re-entered the Lok Sabha as an Independent MP from Allahabad. Witnessing V. P. Singh's meteoric rise on national stage, Rajiv tried to counter him with another prominent Rajput stalwart Satyendra Narain Singh but failed eventually.
On 11 October 1988, the birth anniversary of Jayprakasha Narayan, V. P Singh made Jana Morcha merge with the Janata Party & some of its breakaway factions like the Janata Party (Secular), Lok Dal & Congress (Jagjivan) to form the Janata Dal. Singh then formed the National Front consisting of the Janata Dal, Congress (Socialist) of Sarat Chandra Sinha, TDP of N. T. Rama Rao, DMK of M. Karunanidhi & AGP of Prafulla Mahanta. The National Front also received outside support of Lal Krishna Advani from the Bharatiya Janata Party (which had also been formed out of the Janata Party) & Jyoti Basu from the Communist Party of India (Marxist).
To remove the allegations of Muslim appeasement against the Congress (I) party, Rajiv Gandhi took the step of unlocking the gates of the disputed Babri Masjid in Ayodhya in 1986, which inadvertently caused increased public consciousness about the dispute over the site. The BJP was able to galvanize significant support from the country's Hindu majority towards itself by its electoral promise of constructing a Hindu temple at the site after tearing down the mosque.
Voting was not held in Assam due to rising unrest and a rebellion of Bodos, culminating into a massacre of 535 people at Gohpur. The Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu was split into Goa and Daman & Diu with Goa retaining its two seats and the latter gaining a seat, resulting in the total number of Lok Sabha seats increasing by one to a total of 543. As elections were not held in Assam, only 529 seats were contested.


== Results ==


== Results by State/UT ==

NOTE:
The LF (Left Front) consisted of the CPI(M), CPI, RSP, and AIFB.


== Aftermath ==
V. P. Singh, who was the head of the Janata Dal, was chosen leader of the National Front government with outside support of the BJP & CPI(M). The alliance broke down after Singh supported Bihar's Chief Minister Lalu Prasad Yadav's step to arrest Advani in Samastipur to stop his Ram Rath Yatra, which was going to the Babri Masjid site in Ayodhya on 23 October 1990. Following this incident, BJP withdrew their support to Singh government, causing them to lose parliamentary vote of confidence on 7 November 1990.
Chandra Shekhar broke away from the Janata Dal with 64 MPs and formed the Samajwadi Janata Party in 1990. He got outside support from the Congress(I) and became the 8th Prime Minister of India. He finally resigned on 21 June 1991, after the Congress(I) withdrew its support alleging that the Chandra Shekhar government was spying on Rajiv Gandhi.


== See also ==
V. P. Singh ministry
Chandra Shekhar ministry
List of members of the 9th Lok Sabha
1989 Indian general election by state or union territory


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Krishna, Ananth V. (2011), India Since Independence: Making Sense Of Indian Politics, Pearson Education India, ISBN 9788131734650


== External links ==
"Elections 1989: Congress(I) faces prospect of being routed in Bihar". India Today. 30 November 1989.
Pandya, Haresh (29 November 2008). "V. P. Singh, a Leader of India Who Defended Poor, Dies at 77". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 November 2020.

The 1991 Indian economic crisis was an economic crisis in India resulting from a balance of payments deficit due to excess reliance on imports and other external factors. India's economic problems started worsening in 1985 as imports swelled, leaving the country in a double deficit: the Indian trade balance was in deficit at a time when the government was running on a huge fiscal deficit.
The fall of the Eastern Bloc, which had trade relations with India and allowed for rupee exchange, posed significant issues. The Soviet Union was India's largest trading partner until 1991, with bilateral trade of over $5 billion per year, the turmoil in USSR triggered the collapse in India's export. Towards the end of 1990, leading up to the Gulf War, the situation became dire. India's foreign exchange reserves were not enough to finance three weeks' worth of imports. Additionally, the Gulf War, specifically the conflict between Iraq and Kuwait, caused a significant shift in the trade deficit as India relied on these nations for crude oil. The surge in crude oil prices further exacerbated the imbalance in India's balance of payments. Meanwhile, the government was on the brink of defaulting on its financial obligations. In July of that year, the rupee experienced a sharp depreciation/devaluation due to the low reserves, which further worsened the twin deficit problem.
In February 1991, the Chandra Shekhar ministry was unable to pass the budget after Moody's downgraded India's bond ratings. The ratings declined further due to the unsuccessful passage of the budget, making it increasingly challenging and expensive for India to borrow money from international capital markets. This placed additional pressure on the country's economy. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) suspended its loan program to India, and the World Bank also discontinued its assistance. These actions limited the government's options to address the crisis and forced it to take drastic measures to avoid defaulting on its payments.
To address the economic crisis, the government implemented various measures, including the pledge of a significant portion of India's gold reserves to the Bank of England and the Union Bank of Switzerland as collateral. The aim of this move was to secure much-needed foreign exchange to meet India's debt obligations and stabilize the economy. However, this decision was not without controversy and was seen by some as a drastic and desperate move. Critics viewed the decision to mortgage the country's gold as a sign of the government's limited options and inability to manage the crisis effectively.
The economic crisis created a situation where India had to accept the conditions imposed by the World Bank and the IMF, which included structural reforms. As a result, the Indian economy was opened up to foreign participation in various sectors, including state-owned enterprises. This move towards liberalisation was seen by some as necessary to secure much-needed funds and prevent defaults on its loan payments. However, it also led to concerns about the impact of foreign entities on India's economy and the potential loss of control over vital industries.
India's liberalisation policies since 1991 have led to significant economic growth and integration into the global economy, but have also faced criticism for uneven distribution of benefits, austerity, unemployment and negative impacts on the environment.


== Causes and context ==
During the 1970s, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) began to increasingly criticise capital controls and shifted its perspective away from the belief that high unemployment was primarily due to insufficient demand. Instead, it started to emphasise the significance of 'inflexible' labor markets and other supply-side factors as the main causes of economic issues. These shifting views eventually laid the groundwork for what would be recognised as the 'Washington Consensus.' These set of economic liberalisation strategies were 'recommended' (or forced) upon developing nations like India by Washington-based institutions, including the IMF, the World Bank, and the United States government's economic departments.
The Volcker shock caused capital outflows from the developing world, causing external dollar denominated debt crises and economic slowdowns in Latin America and other developing countries, including India. This along with Gulf War oil price spike and the dissolution of the USSR and Eastern Bloc leaving the U.S. as the sole superpower gave the previously stated institutions the perfect opportunity to force its policies upon developing countries.
The crisis was caused by currency overvaluation; the current account deficit, and investor confidence played significant role in the sharp exchange rate depreciation.
During the mid-eighties, India started having balance of payments problems. Precipitated by the Gulf War, India's oil import bill swelled, exports slumped, credit dried up, and investors took their money out. Large fiscal deficits combined with the fixed exchange rate had a spillover effect on the trade deficit culminating in an external payments crisis. By the end of the 1980s, India was in serious economic trouble.

One of the main causes of the crisis was the accumulation of foreign debt. In the 1980s, India had borrowed heavily from international lenders, in part to finance infrastructure projects and industrialisation. However, by 1991, the country was facing a severe balance of payments crisis, as it was unable to service its debt and was running out of foreign exchange reserves. There were also structural problems in the Indian economy that contributed to the crisis, including low savings and investment rates, and inadequate export growth.
The foreign exchange reserves by 1991 had dried up to the point that India could barely finance three weeks worth of imports.
In mid-1991, India's exchange rate was subjected to a severe adjustment. This event began with a slide in the value of the Indian rupee leading up to mid-1991. The authorities at the Reserve Bank of India took partial action, defending the currency by expanding international reserves and slowing the decline in value. However, in mid-1991, with foreign reserves nearly depleted, the Indian government permitted a sharp devaluation that took place in two steps within three days (1 July and 3 July 1991) against major currencies.


== Recovery ==

With India's foreign exchange reserves at $1.2 billion in January 1991 and depleted by half by June, barely enough to last for roughly 3 weeks of essential imports, India was only weeks away from defaulting on its external balance of payment obligations.
The Government of India's immediate response was to secure an emergency loan of $7 billion from the International Monetary Fund by pledging 67 tons of India's gold reserves as collateral security. The Reserve Bank of India had to airlift 47 tons of gold to the Bank of England and 20 tons of gold to the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) to raise $600 million. The government, in the midst of the 1991 Indian general elections, conducted the airlift with secrecy. The news of the government pledging the entire gold reserves against the loan outraged national sentiments and caused a public outcry. The gold was transported to London via a chartered plane from May 21 to May 31, 1991. The Chandra Shekhar government, which authorised the airlift, collapsed a few months later. This move was seen as prioritising the balance of payment crisis over the welfare of the Indian people and kick-started P.V. Narasimha Rao's economic reform process. In 2024, the RBI has returned its 100 tonnes of gold reserves to India from the UK for the first time since 1991, and by this process, India started holding most of the gold reserves in its own vaults.


=== Under the Narasimha Rao government ===
P. V. Narasimha Rao took over as Prime Minister in June, and appointed Dr Manmohan Singh as the Finance Minister. The Narasimha Rao government ushered in several reforms that are collectively referred to as liberalisation in the Indian media.
The reforms formally began on 1 July 1991 when RBI devalued the rupee by 9% and by a further 11% on 3 July. It was done in two doses to test the reaction of the market first by making a smaller depreciation of 9%. The economic reforms pushed by Prime Minister Rao were met with significant opposition from those who believed that they resulted in a reduction of India's autonomy. The speech made by then Prime Minister Rao, a week after taking office, emphasized the need for these reforms. As reported by the New York Times, "Mr. Rao, who was sworn in as Prime Minister last week, has already sent a signal to the nation—as well as the I.M.F.—that India faced no "soft options" and must open the door to foreign investment, reduce the bureaucratic red tape that stifles initiative, and streamline industrial policy."


== Aftermath ==

Since the implementation of economic reforms in 1991, India has experienced substantial economic growth and has emerged as a prominent participant in the global economy. The liberalisation policies of the Indian government have facilitated this growth by attracting foreign investments, increasing trade relations, and promoting domestic economic reforms.
However, while some argue that these policies have benefited India, there are criticisms that suggest otherwise. Some experts argue that the growth has been uneven, and the benefits of liberalisation policies have not been equally distributed across the country. Inequality has increased as the divide between the rich and poor has widened, and marginalized communities have been left behind. Additionally, some have argued that liberalisation policies have had negative impacts on the environment and have not addressed issues related to sustainability and social justice.
Despite these criticisms, the Indian government continues to promote liberalisation policies and seeks to further integrate into the global economy. The success of these policies remains a subject of debate and continues to be a significant point of discussion among policymakers, economists, and civil society groups.
India's gross domestic product (GDP), adjusted for inflation, increased from $266 billion in 1991 to $4.18 trillion in 2025, while its purchasing power parity increased from $1 trillion in 1991 to $17 trillion in 2025.
Poverty has declined steeply from 55.1% in 2005–06 to 16.4% in 2019–20. In addition to the economic growth and development, access to basic necessities such as food, shelter, and healthcare have drastically improved for people in India. Additionally, life expectancy has consistently improved from an average of 58.7 years in 1990 to an average of 67.2 in 2021.
These challenges while not unique to developing countries, are being addressed considerably well by India over the last few decades. The Indian government has implemented various policies to address these issues, such as poverty alleviation programs, healthcare initiatives, and education reforms. While progress has been significant, there is room for more to promote sustainable development in India.


=== Continued current account deficit ===
Despite implementing liberal reforms in 1991, India has been unable to eliminate its current account deficit. In contrast to countries like China and Vietnam, which have managed to achieve a surplus, India continues to face this imbalance. Consequently, India relies on foreign capital inflows in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) and foreign portfolio investment (FPI) to meet its balance of payments requirements. However, this dependence on foreign investment makes India more susceptible to external shocks.
An example of such vulnerability is the potential impact of the U.S. Federal Reserve raising interest rates. In the event of a rate hike, foreign investors in "risky" emerging markets like India may redirect their investments towards "safe" markets such as Europe and the U.S. As a result, these investors would sell their assets denominated in Indian rupees in exchange for foreign currency assets. Consequently, India's foreign exchange reserves would diminish, and the value of the rupee would weaken and imports would become more expensive.


== See also ==
Corruption in India
Economic history of India
Economy of India
Licence Raj


== References ==

General elections were held in India on 20 May, 12 June and 15 June 1991 to elect the members of the 10th Lok Sabha, although they were delayed until 19 February 1992 in Punjab.
No party won a majority in the Lok Sabha, resulting in the Indian National Congress (Indira) forming a minority government under new Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao with the support of other parties. The government survived  28 July 1993 no confidence vote in controversial circumstances by bribing MPs from the Janata Dal and the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha.
Elections were not held for the six seats allocated to Jammu and Kashmir, nor for two seats in Bihar and one in Uttar Pradesh. Similarly, elections were also delayed in Punjab. Voter turnout was 57%, the lowest to date in an Indian general election.


== Background ==
In the previous elections held 16 months before, the Janata Dal came into power with outside support of the Bharatiya Janata Party. However, the BJP withdrew its support from the government after its Ram Rathyatra was stopped at Samastipur in Bihar,  a state ruled by the Janata Dal, whose Chief Minister Lalu Prasad Yadav had the BJP president Lal Krishna Advani arrested on spot. Following the resignation of V. P. Singh, the main opposition party, the Indian National Congress (Indira) provided outside support to a small breakaway faction of the Janata Dal, the Samajwadi Janata Party headed by Chandra Shekhar for a time, but soon withdrew its support. Over 500 million eligible voters were once again given the chance to elect their government. The elections were held in a polarised environment and are also referred to as the 'Mandal-Mandir' elections after the two most important poll issues, the Mandal Commission fallout and the Ram Mandir-Babri Masjid issue.


=== Mandal-Mandir issue ===
While the Mandal Commission report released by the VP Singh government suggested giving 27 per cent reservation to the Other Backward Castes (OBCs) in government jobs, it led to widespread violence and protests across the country with many students from the Forward Caste groups in and around the capital city of Delhi even setting themselves on fire in opposition to increase in reservations. Violence also erupted between Scheduled Caste groups, who opposed increasing reservation for other communities & OBC groups, who supported reservation for their own community. 'Mandir' represented the hallmark of this election, where there was a debate over construction of Ram Mandir at the disputed site of the Babri Masjid in Ayodhya which the Hindu right wing Bharatiya Janata Party was using as its major election manifesto. To counter the intense religious polarisation unleashed due to the Ram mandir movement, the ruling Janata Dal heavily campaigned on implementing the Mandal Commission report, which the BJP alleged was a ploy to undermine Hindu unity.
The Mandir-Mandal issue led to numerous riots in many parts of the country and the electorate was polarised on caste and religious lines. With the Janata Dal beginning to fall apart into different splinter groups each supporting a particular caste in a specific state, the Congress (I) managed to make the most of the polarisation, by getting the most seats and forming a minority government.


=== Rajiv Gandhi assassination ===

A day after the first round of polling took place on 20 May, former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated while campaigning for Margatham Chandrasekar in Sriperembudur. The remaining election days were postponed until mid-June and voting finally took place on 12 and 15 June.
Since the assassination took place after first phase of polling in 211 of 534 constituencies and the balance constituencies went to polls after the assassination, the 1991 results varied greatly between phases. After the assassination, voter sentiment shifted dramatically, many undecided and regional voters moved toward INC for stability. Congress (I) retained strong regional dominance in parts of India that voted in the first polling phase, and although Rajiv Gandhi's assassination affected public sentiment, it did not result in a national seat sweep in later phases,which included major states where BJP and Janata Dal won a large share of seats. The result was a Congress (I)-led minority government supported by the Janata Dal and led by P. V. Narasimha Rao, who had previously announced his retirement from politics. While Rao had not contested in the election, he contested in a by-election in Nandyal which he won by a record five lakh votes.


=== Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab ===
76 to 126 people were shot dead during the campaign on 17 June 1991 in two attacks by Khalistani gunmen in Punjab, an area racked by separatist violence since the 1980s. Police reports said the killings, on separate trains, were carried out by Sikh militants. Similarly, insurgency in Kashmir also saw the mass exodus of Kashmiri Hindus from the Kashmir Valley under threats from Pakistan-sponsored Muslim militants. Due to these insurgencies, no elections were held in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab, a total of 19 Lok Sabha seats. Elections were held in Punjab on 19 February 1992, where INC won 12 out of 13 seats, thereby taking their tally in the Lok Sabha up from 232 to 244.


== Results ==


=== Delayed elections in Punjab ===


== State wise results ==


== Aftermath ==
Congress (I) was in a position to form government. The persons, mentioned in media, as probable prime minister, were:

Former Home, and Foreign minister P. V. Narasimha Rao
Chief Minister of Maharashtra Sharad Pawar
Former Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh Arjun Singh
Former Finance, and Foreign minister N. D. Tiwari
At the suggestion of Rajiv's wife Sonia, P. V. Narasimha Rao was chosen as the prime-ministerial candidate of Congress (Indira). Rao, who was by-elected from Nandyal, secured the outside support of the Janata Dal & Jharkhand Mukti Morcha under controversial circumstances. After Lal Bahadur Shastri, Rao was the second Congress Prime Minister from outside the Nehru-Gandhi family and the second Congress Prime Minister to head a minority government that completed full 5-year term (Indira Gandhi also headed a minority government from 1969 to 1971 following the 1969 split of the Congress party into Congress(O) & Congress(R)).


== See also ==
List of members of the 10th Lok Sabha
1991 Indian general election by state or union territory
1992 Indian general election in Punjab


== References ==

General elections were held in India on 27 April, 2 May and 7 May 1996 to elect the members of the eleventh Lok Sabha. 
The elections resulted in a hung parliament with no single party having a majority. The Bharatiya Janata Party, which had won the most seats despite finishing second in the popular vote, formed a short-lived government under Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. However, two weeks later the United Front coalition was able to secure a parliamentary majority and H. D. Deve Gowda of Janata Dal became prime minister. In 1997 Inder Kumar Gujral, also from the United Front, succeeded Gowda as prime minister. Due to the instability, early elections were held in 1998. The elections were the first since 1980 in which every states' seats were elected in a single election period.


== Background ==
The Indian National Congress government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao came into the election on the back of several government scandals like the 1992 Indian stock market scam and accusations of mismanagement. Seven cabinet members had resigned during the previous term, and Rao himself faced charges of corruption. The Congress(I) more generally had been plagued in recent years by a series of splits, conflicts and factional disputes that had seen various key regional parties and figures abandon the party. In particular, the high-profile May 1995 defection of Arjun Singh and Narayan Datt Tiwari to form the new All India Indira Congress (Tiwari) party underscored the internal divisions within the Congress (Indira).
The government was further weakened by a series of major scandals breaking less than 12 months from the election. In July 1995 it was found a former Congress(I) youth leader had murdered his wife and tried to destroy the evidence by stuffing her corpse into a tandoor (clay oven). In August 1995 the Vohra Report was finally released to the parliament, decrying that a politician-criminal nexus was "virtually running a parallel government, pushing the state apparatus into irrelevance". Government credibility fell further still when in late 1995 violence significantly worsened in the Kashmir region, and sporadic fighting and ethnic tensions boiled over in Punjab province. As a result of the scandals, the Rao government went into the 1996 election at a low of ebb of public support.


== Campaign ==
The elections triggered a significant realignment of political forces in Indians, with all-India parties attempting to construct widespread regional coalitions with minor parties in order to secure a central majority. Such political negotiations were to become an increasingly necessary process in Indian politics over the next two decades as the dominance of the INC(I) declined and smaller, ethnic and regional parties took its place. The Bharatiya Janata Party, led by Lal Krishna Advani attempted to add several regional coalition partners - most notably the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and the Bahujan Samaj Party, but was ultimately unsuccessful in overcoming ideological differences. Yet it did join with several strong regional partners - Shiv Sena, Haryana Vikas Party, and the Samata Party. The Congress(I) party attempted to form regional allies as well, most notably with the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.
The so-called "Third Force" during the 1996 elections was the National Front. After its collapse in 1990, the coalition had chopped and changed before reuniting in the run up to the 1996 election. Three main parties grouped back together in September 1995 in hopes of presenting a viable political choice - the Communist parties like the Communist Party of India and Communist Party of India (Marxist), Janata Dal and the Telugu Desam Party. It attempted to build a wider coalition of regional partners and state parties, however negotiations repeatedly broke down, and no consensus could be arrived at on a 'common minimum program' - a platform of issues on which all parties could agree upon. A split in the Uttar Pradesh government in December 1995 divided the front further. Finally, lacking a strong leader or common set of principles, the main three parties joined with the Samajwadi Party in a common goal of simply denying power to either the Congress(I) or BJP. Thus a characteristic of the 1996 elections was a large number of strong regional and state parties declined to form an alliance with any of the three major contenders for government.
In January, only a few months before the election, a major scandal erupted: the Jain hawala scandal. Jain, an industrialist in the steel and power sectors, was revealed to have given US$33 million in bribes to politicians from nearly all major parties in return for favours. Further shocking the public, Jain had also channelled money to Kashmiri Muslim militants. In the first wave of names implicated were three Rao cabinet members, Arjun Singh from the breakaway Congress (T) party, Bharatiya Janata Party leader Lal Krishna Advani, Sharad Yadav (leader of the Janata Dal parliamentary party), and former Congress(I) Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. Almost 115 names would eventually be released, and numerous candidates and ministers were forced to resign in the aftermath. Most significantly was the resignation of L.K. Advani as Member of Parliament, though he continued to lead the election campaigning as the BJP's president.
The BJP ran a campaign centred around a four-point plan which aimed for probity of public life, self-reliance in the economy, social harmony and greater security. It strongly advocated an economic plan which would significantly scale back government intervention and encourage capital investment and creation. In the backdrop of the 1992 demolition of the Babri Masjid, BJP stressed on the role of Hindutva in its vision for India, creating a more Hindu-orientated state by removing the provisions of secularism and making Hinduism the country's state religion, implementing a nationwide ban on cow slaughter, abolishing personal laws of non-Hindus by introducing a uniform civil code and removing the special status of Kashmir alongside construction of the Ram-mandir as its main agenda. The Congress(I) Party attempted to campaign on its foreign policy record, its handling of the numerous natural and ethnic crises that had emerged over the past five years, and on better concessions for ethnic minorities and empowering the state governments. It additionally stressed the economic gains already made by the government due to its liberalization policies post 1992. However it drew flak for promising re-construction of the demolished mosque at the disputed site of Ayodhya in its electoral manifesto, leading the BJP to accuse the Congress (Indira) of indulging in Muslim appeasement and fostering Hinduphobia. The Janata Dal and the National Front campaigned on maintaining a strong public sector though with some commitment to deregulation and anti-corruption measures while committing to implement the Mandal Commission report. It also pushed other more populist measures as well, such as more state-run infrastructure projects, subsidised fertilizer, and increased education investment.


== Results ==

The BJP capitalised on the communal polarisation that followed the demolition of Babri Masjid to win 161 Lok Sabha seats, making it the largest party in parliament. L.K. Advani, whose aggressive campaigning as BJP president is widely credited with these results. The election delivered an unclear mandate and resulted in a hung parliament. Although Congress continued to remain the single largest party in terms of voteshare, it was for the first time since the country's first general elections that the Congress' voteshare fell below 30% on a national scale. The Congress also for the first time in its existence, won fewer than 150 seats in a general election, surpassing the record of 154 seats in the 1977 general elections. Hence the result was considered as the worst result of the Congress party in its history to that date, with commentators blaming the poor result on the personal unpopularity of Prime Minister Rao and the numerous internal divisions that had dogged the party alongside the religious polarisation fueled by the BJP under the Ayodhya dispute. Congress(I) was almost wiped out in its traditional strongholds of Uttar Pradesh & Bihar with many stalwarts like Ram Lakhan Singh Yadav, Jagannath Mishra, Satyendra Narayan Sinha suffered electoral setbacks inflicted by both Janata Dal & BJP. The BJP became the largest party within the Lok Sabha, a first for a non-Congress party, although it secured neither a significant increase in the popular vote or enough seats to secure a parliamentary majority.


== Aftermath ==
Following Westminster custom, President Shankar Dayal Sharma invited Atal Bihari Vajpayee as leader of the BJP to form a government. Sworn in on 15 May, the new prime minister was given two weeks to prove majority support in parliament. In the weeks leading up to the first confidence vote on 31 May, the BJP attempted to build a coalition by moderating positions to garner support from regional and Muslim parties, however sectarian issues and fears of certain nationalist policies of the BJP hampered efforts. On 28 May, Vajpayee conceded that he could not arrange support from more than 200 of the 545 members of parliament, and thus resigned rather than face the confidence vote, ending his 13-day government.
The second largest party, the Indian National Congress (Indira), also declined to form a government. After Janata Dal leader V. P. Singh refused to become prime minister for a second time, CPI(M) leader and West Bengal Chief Minister Jyoti Basu was approached by the National Front to be its prime ministerial face, but the party politburo refused to endorse it (a decision which Basu later criticised as a "historic blunder") in order to affirm its commitment towards establishing dictatorship of the proletariat. Basu put forward the name of Janata Dal leader and Karnataka Chief Minister H. D. Deve Gowda as the candidate for the Prime Minister post. Janata Dal and a bloc of smaller parties thus formed the United Front government, with outside support from INC(I). Gowda resigned on 21 April 1997 due to withdrawal of support by the Indian National Congress to pave way for I. K. Gujral, who maintained good relations with the Congress.
However the Fodder Scam resulted in many United Front members demanding the resignation of Lalu Prasad Yadav, an alliance partner and the then Chief Minister of Bihar. Yadav retaliated by breaking away from Janata Dal and forming Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) on 3 July 1997. Out of 45 Janata Dal members of parliament, 17 left the party and supported Yadav. However, the new party continued to support the United Front and Gujral's government was saved from immediate danger. Gujral resigned 11 months later when INC withdrew support from the government over Gujral's refusal to expel DMK from the government, whose leader M. Karunanidhi was implicated in assisting Rajiv Gandhi's assassination and the country went back to the polls in 1998.


== See also ==
List of members of the 11th Lok Sabha
1996 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==

General elections were held in India on 16, 22 and 28 February 1998 to elect the members of the twelfth Lok Sabha. The elections were held three years ahead of schedule after the government led by Inder Kumar Gujral collapsed when the Indian National Congress (INC) withdrew its support in November 1997.
The result was another hung parliament, with no party or alliance able to muster a majority. However, Atal Bihari Vajpayee of the Bharatiya Janata Party was able to form a coalition government led by the National Democratic Alliance with the outside support of the Telugu Desam Party and several other parties with just an MP or two, like the parties from North-Eastern states like Arunachal Congress, Manipur Congress, Sikkim Democratic Front. Vajpayee was sworn in as Prime Minister with support from 272 of 543 MPs. However, his government collapsed on 17 April 1999 when the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam withdrew its support, after Vajpayee refused to meet the demands of its leader J. Jayalalithaa, namely halting the corruption cases against her and the sacking of the Tamil Nadu government led by her bete-noire M. Karunanidhi. This led to fresh elections in 1999.
The elections were the second consecutive general elections in which the party that received the most votes did not win the most seats.


== Results ==


=== By state and alliance ===


== Support for the New Government ==


== See also ==
List of members of the 12th Lok Sabha
Category:1998 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==

General elections were held in India between 5 September and 3 October 1999, a few months after the Kargil War. Results were announced on 6 October 1999.
The elections saw the National Democratic Alliance led by the Bharatiya Janata Party win a majority in the Lok Sabha, the first time since 1984 that a party or alliance had won an outright majority and the second since the 1977 elections that a non-Congress coalition had done so. It was also the third consecutive election in which the party that won the most votes overall did not win the most seats. The elections gave Atal Bihari Vajpayee the record of being the first non-Congress Prime Minister to serve a full five-year term. The decisive result also ended the political instability the country had seen since the 1996 elections that had resulted in a hung parliament. Although the Indian National Congress was able to increase its vote share, its 114 seat tally was considered to be its worst-ever performance in a general election in terms of the number of seats obtained until the 2014 general elections.


== Background ==


=== 1999 Lok Sabha vote of confidence ===
On 17 April 1999 the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) coalition government led by prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee failed to win a confidence vote in the Lok Sabha (India's lower house) by a single vote due to the withdrawal of one of the government's coalition partners – the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK). The general secretary of the AIADMK J. Jayalalithaa, had consistently threatened to withdraw support from the ruling coalition if certain demands were not met, in particular the sacking of the Tamil Nadu government, control of which she had lost three years prior to her arch rival M. Karunanidhi. The BJP accused Jayalalithaa of making the demands in order to avoid standing trial for a series of corruption charges, and no agreement between the parties could be reached leading to the government's defeat.
Sonia Gandhi, as leader of the opposition and largest opposition party (Indian National Congress) was unable to form a coalition of parties large enough to secure a working majority in the Lok Sabha. Neither Mulayam Singh nor Jayalalithaa supported Gandhi, instead Jayalalithaa proposed West Bengal chief minister Jyoti Basu for prime minister; he also declined the position. Thus shortly after the no confidence motion, President K. R. Narayanan dissolved the Parliament and called fresh elections. Atal Bihari Vajpayee remained caretaker prime minister till the elections were held later that year.


== Election schedule ==
The polling schedule for the 1999 general elections was announced by the Chief Election Commissioner M. S. Gill on 11 July 1999. It was revised on 3 August 1999. The revised schedule is given below. 


== Campaign ==
The incumbent Hindu right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) went into the election as the head of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), a coalition of over 20 parties. Several other parties in the election not part of the NDA also committed themselves to supporting a BJP led government on matters of confidence.
The main opposition league was led by Sonia Gandhi's Indian National Congress, the long-traditional centrist dominant party in India. The opposition coalition comprised far fewer parties, and its alliances were generally weaker than those of the NDA. A so-called "third front" of left-wing, socialist and communist parties was also present, although this was not a strong electoral alliance so much as a loose grouping of parties that shared similar ideological viewpoints and had some inter-party co-operation. There were also nearly one thousand candidates of unaffiliated parties, independent candidates and parties who were unwilling to take part in coalitions that stood in the election.
The campaign coalesced around a few key issues. Sonia Gandhi was a relative newcomer to the INC (having been elected to the presidency in 1998) and her leadership had recently been challenged by Marathi INC leader Sharad Pawar, on the grounds of her Italian birth. This led to an underlying crisis within the INC that persisted during the election and was capitalised upon by the BJP, which contrasted the "videsi" (foreign) Gandhi versus the "swadesi" (home-grown) Vajpayee.
Another issue running in the BJP's favour was the generally positive view of Vajpayee's handling of the Kargil War, which had ended a few months earlier and had affirmed and strengthened the Indian position in Kashmir. During the past two years India had posted strong economic growth on the back of economic liberalisation and financial reforms, as well as a low rate of inflation and higher rate of industrial expansion. The BJP campaigned strongly on the back of these achievements, as well as cultivating some sympathy for the predicament which had led to the government's downfall.
Perhaps most decisive though in the BJP's campaign was the solid alliance it had cultivated and the relatively strong performance it was able to deliver on regional and local issues.  The 1991, 1996, and 1998 elections saw a period of consistent growth for the BJP and its allies, based primarily on arousing Hindu sentiments around the Ayodhya dispute, which culminated into large-scale Hindu-Muslim riots in the wake of the 1992 demolition of Babri Masjid. It also underwent political expansions in terms of cultivating stronger and broader alliances with other previously unaffiliated parties which were opposed to Congress hegemony but not ideological aligned with the BJP; and regional expansion which saw the NDA become competitive and even the largest vote takers in previously Congress dominated areas such as Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and Assam. These final factors were to prove decisive in the election outcome of 1999.
Voting was conducted over five days. Elections were conducted in 146 seats on the Eastern coast of the country on 5 September, in 123 Central and Southern seats on 11 September, in 76 Northern and Upper-Central seats on 18 September, in 74 North Western seats on 25 September and in the 121 Western seats on 3 October. Despite some fears of voter fatigue, electoral turnout was comparable with previous elections at 60%. Over 5 million election officials conducted the election over 800,000 polling stations, with vote counting commencing on 6 October.


== Results ==
The results in terms of seats were decisively in favour of the BJP and the NDA, with the alliance picking up 299 seats. Despite increasing its popular vote share and receiving the most votes overall, the Congress party lost 23 seats, and its two key regional allies performed worse than expected; however, it did regain ground in some states such as Uttar Pradesh (where it had been wiped out in 1998, not winning a single seat in the state).
The seat result for the Indian National Congress was the worst in nearly half a century, with party leader Sonia Gandhi calling upon the party to take a frank assessment of itself – "the result calls for introspection, frank assessment and determined action. We will attend to this in the coming days. In the meantime, we accept unhesitatingly the verdict of the people". For the BJP, this marked the first occasion where a non-INC party had secured a stable government coalition. Previous non-INC governing coalitions had been formed in 1977, 1989 and 1996; however, none of these administrations had been able to maintain a stable coagulation for more than a couple of years. One Senior BJP figure commented in the aftermath "It will certainly be a government of stability...I expect that Mr Vajpayee, with all his experience, will be able to handle our coalition partners."


=== By state and alliance ===


== Support for the new government ==


== See also ==
List of members of the 13th Lok Sabha
1999 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==

The 19th SAARC summit was a scheduled diplomatic conference which was originally planned to be held in Islamabad, Pakistan, on 15–19 November 2016, but got cancelled after an attack on an Indian army camp in Kashmir. The summit was to be attended by the leaders of the eight SAARC member states and representatives of observers and guest states.
Following the rising diplomatic tensions after the 2016 Uri attack, India announced its boycott of the summit, alleging Pakistan's involvement in the attack. Later, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, and Bhutan also pulled out of the summit. culminating in an indefinite postponement of the summit.


== Background ==
Following the 2016 Uri terror attack, India cancelled its participation in the 19th SAARC summit,  alleging Pakistan's involvement in the terror attack.


== Reactions by member nations ==
Bangladesh also pulled out of the summit in Islamabad. The Bangladeshi Foreign Ministry conveyed to the SAARC Chair Nepal that Pakistan's increasing interference in Bangladesh's domestic affairs is inimical to the interest of Bangladesh and under such circumstances it is not possible to participate in the summit at Islamabad. The ministry maintained that "Bangladesh, as the initiator of the SAARC process, remains steadfast in its commitment to regional cooperation, connectivity, and contacts but believes that these can only go forward in a more congenial atmosphere".
Afghanistan announced its withdrawal from the summit, stating, "Due to increased level of violence and fighting as a result of imposed terrorism on Afghanistan, (President) Ashraf Ghani with his responsibilities as the Commander-in-Chief will be fully engaged, and will not be able to attend the Summit."
Bhutan also withdrew from the summit. The country stated that the "recent escalation of terrorism in the region has seriously compromised the environment for the successful holding" of the summit. The Bhutanese government added that it also shared the concerns of some member states on the "deterioration of regional peace because of terror".
Sri Lanka, backing a call for postponing the 19th South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Summit in Pakistan, said the prevailing environment in the region was not conducive for holding the event.
The Maldives, which initially refrained from boycotting and instead urged a conductive environment be created for the summit, later boycotted the event  condemning international terrorism, especially those originating from outside.
Nepal, the current chair of SAARC, urged that "a conducive environment be created soon to ensure the participation of all member states in the 19th SAARC summit in line with the spirit of the SAARC charter". It also asked the member countries "to ensure that their respective territories are not used by terrorists for cross border terrorism".
Pakistan first postponed the conference to a further date, citing Article X (General Provisions) of the SAARC Charter that all decisions at all levels shall be taken on the basis of unanimity. However, after Maldives, sixth of the eight member nations, pulled out, Pakistan was forced to cancel the summit altogether.


== See also ==
List of SAARC summits
2016 Uri attack


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website

The inaugural BRIC summit took place in Yekaterinburg, Russia on June 16, 2009. The four heads of state or heads of government from the BRIC countries attended. 


== Overview ==
The acronym BRIC (for Brazil, Russia, India, China) was first used in a Goldman Sachs thesis projecting that the economic potential of Brazil, Russia, India and China is such that they may become among the five most dominant economies by the year 2050. Today, the four countries produce about 15 percent of the world’s gross domestic product and hold about 40 percent of the gold and hard currency reserves.
Political dialogue between the BRIC countries began in New York in September 2006, with a meeting of the BRIC foreign ministers. Four high-level meetings have followed, including a full-scale meeting in Yekaterinburg, Russia, on May 16, 2008.


== Participants ==

The heads of state and heads of government of the four countries participated.


== Gallery of participating leaders ==


== Issues ==
The leaders discussed the 2008 financial crisis, global development, and further strengthening of the BRIC group.


=== World economy ===
The BRIC leaders called for increased economic reform, demanding a "greater voice and representation in international financial institutions, and their heads and senior leadership should be appointed through an open, transparent and merit-based selection process."
They urged the international community to push for comprehensive results of the Doha Round.


=== Political issues ===
Amongst the important issues discussed were United Nations reform. "We reiterate the importance we attach to the status of India and Brazil in international affairs, and understand and support their aspirations to play a greater role in the United Nations."


=== Food crisis ===
Regarding the 2007–2008 world food price crisis, the leaders issued a joint statement on global food security, calling for "action by all governments and the relevant international agencies"; and reaffirmed "their commitment to contribute to the efforts to overcome the global food crisis".


== References ==


== External links ==
First BRIC summit Official website
The Sino-Brazilian Principles in a Latin American and BRICS Context: The Case for Comparative Public Budgeting Legal Research Wisconsin International Law Journal, 13 May 2015

The 1st millennium of the anno Domini or Common Era was a millennium spanning the years 1 to 1000 (1st to 10th centuries; in astronomy: JD 1721425.5 – 2086667.5). The world population rose more slowly than during the preceding millennium, from about 200 million in the year 1 to about 300 million in the year 1000.
In Western Eurasia (Europe and Near East), the first millennium was a time of great transition from Classical Antiquity to the Middle Ages. The 1st century saw the peak of the Roman Empire, followed by its gradual decline during the period of Late Antiquity, the rise of Christianity and the Great Migrations. The second half of the millennium is characterized as the Early Middle Ages in Europe, and marked by the Viking expansion in the west, and the continuation of the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire) in the east.
In East Asia, the first millennium was also a time of great cultural advances, notably the spread of Buddhism to East Asia. In China, the Han dynasty is replaced by the Jin dynasty and later the Tang dynasty until the 10th century sees renewed fragmentation in the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. In Japan, a sharp increase in population followed when farmers' use of iron tools increased their productivity and crop yields. The Yamato court was established. The North Indian subcontinent was divided among numerous kingdoms throughout the first millennium, until the formation of the Gupta Empire. Islam expanded rapidly from Arabia to western Asia, India, North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula, culminating in the Islamic Golden Age (700–1200).
In Mesoamerica, the first millennium was a period of enormous growth known as the Classic Era (200–900). Teotihuacan grew into a metropolis and its empire dominated Mesoamerica. In South America, pre-Incan, coastal cultures flourished, producing impressive metalwork and some of the finest pottery seen in the ancient world. In North America, the Mississippian culture rose at the end of the millennium in the Mississippi and Ohio river valleys. Numerous cities were built; Cahokia, the largest, was based in present-day Illinois. The construction of Monks Mound at Cahokia was begun in 900–950.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, the Bantu expansion reaches Southern Africa by about the 5th century. The trans-Saharan slave trade spans the Sahara and the Swahili coast by the 9th century.


== Civilizations, kingdoms and dynasties ==


== Events ==
The events in this section are organized according to the United Nations geoscheme


== Inventions, discoveries, introductions ==


== Centuries and decades ==


== References ==

General elections were held in India in four phases between 20 April and 10 May 2004. Over 670 million people were eligible to vote, electing 543 members of the 14th Lok Sabha. Seven states also held simultaneous assembly elections to elect state governments. They were the first elections fully carried out with electronic voting machines (EVMs).
On 13 May the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the lead party of the National Democratic Alliance conceded an upset defeat. The Indian National Congress, which had governed India for all but five decades from independence until 1996, returned to power after a record six years out of office.  It was unable to put a majority alone in 2004. It formed United Progressive Alliance(UPA), which had together a comfortable majority of more than 335 members out of 543 with the help of its allies. The 335 members included both the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance, the governing coalition formed after the election and external support from the Left Front, who threatened to withdraw their support during Nuclear Deal.


== Background ==
Speaker Manohar Joshi, who was from the Shiva Sena(NDA), had recommended premature dissolution of the 13th Lok Sabha (in accordance with a provision of the Constitution) to pave the way for early elections apparently in view of the recent good showing of the BJP in the Assembly elections in four states. But though this recommendation was not accepted by Prime Minister Atal Bihari Bajpayee, the Speaker dissolved the Lok Sabha.


== Organisation ==

The election dates for the parliamentary elections were:

20 April – 141 constituencies
26 April – 137 constituencies
5 May – 83 constituencies
10 May – 182 constituencies
Counting began simultaneously on 13 May. Over 370 million of the 675 million eligible citizens voted, with election violence claiming 48 lives, less than half the number killed during the 1999 election. The Indian elections were held in phases in order to maintain law and order. A few states considered sensitive areas required deployment of the armed forces. The average enrolment of voters in each constituency was 12 lakhs, although the largest constituency had 31 lakhs.
The Election Commission of India is responsible for deciding the dates and conducting elections according to constitutional provisions. The Election Commission employed more than a million electronic voting machines for these elections.
According to India Today, 115.62 billion rupees were expected to have been spent in campaigning for the elections by all political parties combined. Most of the money was spent on the people involved in the election. The Election Commission limited poll expenses to Rs. 25 lakhs per constituency. Thus, the actual spending is expected to have been approximately ten times the limit. About 6.5 billion rupees are estimated to have been spent on mobilising 1,50,000 vehicles. About a billion rupees are estimated to have been spent on helicopters and aircraft.


== Pre-poll alliances ==
In these elections, compared to all the Lok Sabha elections of the 1990s, the battle was more of a head-to-head contest in the sense that there was no viable third front alternative. Largely the contest was between BJP  its allies on one hand and Congress its allies on the other. However, the situation did show large regional differences.
The BJP fought the elections as part of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), although some of its seat-sharing agreements were made with strong regional parties of the NDA such as Telugu Desam Party (TDP) in Andhra Pradesh and All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) in Tamil Nadu.
Ahead of the elections there were attempts to form a Congress-led national level joint opposition front. In the end, an agreement could not be reached, but on regional level alliances between Congress and regional parties were made in several states. This was the first time that Congress contested with that type of alliances in a parliamentary election.
The left parties, most notably the CPM and the CPI, contested on their own in their strongholds West Bengal, Tripura and Kerala, confronting both Congress and NDA forces. In several other states, such as Punjab and Andhra Pradesh, they took part in seat sharings with Congress. In Tamil Nadu they were part of the DMK-led DPA (Democratic Progressive Alliance).
Two parties refused to go along with either Congress or BJP, they were BSP and Samajwadi Party. Both are based in Uttar Pradesh, the largest state of India (in terms of population). Congress made several attempts to form alliances with them, but in vain. Many believed that they would prevent Congress of an electoral victory. The result was a four-cornered contest in UP, which didn't really hurt or benefit BJP or Congress significantly.


== Forecast and campaigns ==
Most analysts believed the NDA would win the elections. This assessment was also supported by opinion polls. The economy had shown steady growth in the last years and the disinvestment of government owned production units (a continuation of India's liberalisation policies ) had been on track. The Foreign Exchange Reserves of India stood at more than US$100 billion (7th largest in the world and a record for India). The service sector had also generated a lot of jobs. The Vajpayee government had launched numerous welfare schemes, thus starting the culture of "Yojana"s in Indian governments.  The party was supposed to have been riding on a wave of the feel good factor, typified by its promotional campaign "India Shining".
In the past, BJP has largely been seen as a hardline Hindu right wing party with close ties with the hardline organisations the RSS and Vishva Hindu Parishad. Over the years, the party under Vajpayee has slightly distanced itself from hardline policies in order to accommodate a variety of parties within the NDA, like TMC (a Congress-breakaway party), breakaway factions of the Janata Dal like INLD, RLD, JD(U) and BJD, Dravidianist parties like DMK (which left the alliance in December 2003), PMK (which left the alliance in January 2004) and AIADMK (which joined after DMK left) and parties largely representing non-Hindus like SAD and JKNC (which joined the alliance in 2002), a change that was being questioned after the party's good performance in the 2003 assembly elections of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh & Chhattisgarh, Karnataka. These elections were marked by the campaign's emphasis on economic gains instead of issues involving religious polarisation. Ban on cow-slaughter, implementation of a Uniform Civil Code, construction of Ram-mandir at the site of Ayodhya, abolition of the provisions of secularism in order to make Hinduism the country's state religion etc. characterised BJP's campaign in the 1996 election. From the last few elections, BJP had realised that its voter base had reached a ceiling and had concentrated on pre-poll rather than post-poll alliances. The Vajpayee wave and foreign origin of Sonia Gandhi also constituted part of the NDA's campaign.


=== Opinion polls ===


=== Exit polls ===


== State/UT-wise voter turnout details ==


== Results ==


=== Region-wise results ===


=== By state and territory ===


==== States ====


==== Territories ====


== Analysis ==

Though pre-poll predictions were for an overwhelming majority for the BJP, the exit polls (immediately after the elections and before the counting began) predicted a hung parliament. However, even the exit polls could only indicate the general trend and nowhere close to the final figures. There is also the general perception that as soon as the BJP started realising that events might not proceed entirely in its favour, it changed the focus of its campaign from India Shining to issues of stability. Congress was regarded as old-fashioned by the ruling NDA and many. But Congress declared that it has largely backing of poor, rural, lower-caste and minority voters though all sections of the society had participated in the economic boom of Vajpayee's years. The BJP declared that, PV Narasimha Rao's govt had created a wealthy middle class. But Congress achieved its victory on grounds of coalition politics.


== Impact ==
The rout of the ruling parties in the states of Tamil Nadu and Kerala in the general elections led to calls for the dissolution of the governments of these states.
The stock market (Bombay Stock Exchange) fell in the week prior to the announcement of the results due to fears of the defeat of NDA government and stoppage of its economic reforms. As soon as counting began, however, it became clear that the Congress coalition was headed for a sizeable lead over the NDA and the market surged, only to crash the following day when the left parties, whose support would be required for government formation, announced that it was their intention to do away with the disinvestment ministry. Following this, Manmohan Singh, the Prime Minister (in office 2004–14) and the prime architect of the economic liberalisation of the early 1990s, hurried to reassure investors that the new government would strive to create a business-friendly climate. Later in his Book, Turning Points Former president Abdul Kalam said that he has no objection against Sonia's candidacy and he said to ready the documents with Sonia as Prime Minister.


== Events ==
13 May - Congress wins a minority of seats in the Lok Sabha (142) and forms UPA which has plurality of seats (219 seats against 188 for the BJP). This event shocks many.
13 May - Counting of votes in the parliamentary elections begins.
11 May - Congress wins the Assembly elections in Andhra Pradesh by 2/3 majority.
10 May - The fourth and final phase of elections comes to an end. Results will come out for 542 of the 543 parliament seats with elections to be held again in Chhapra.
5 May - Third phase of polling comes to an end with the ruling coalition government gaining seats according to exit polls but still off the victory target. Reports of booth capturing in Chhapra, capture headlines.
26 April - Second phase of elections sees 55-60% polling. This is the final phase for assembly elections. Polling covers 136 parliamentary constituencies in 11 states. The share market starts to crash as the investors suspected that the NDA government might find it hard to come back to power—raising doubts about the continuation of economic reforms initiated by the NDA government.
22 April - Tripura, where polling was delayed because of a local holiday, votes for its two MPs. A turnout of close to 60% is reported, despite calls for abstention made by separatists.
20 April - The first phase of the vote is held, with average turnouts of between 50% and 55%. Voting is reported as brisk, and the day unfolds relatively smoothly, albeit with some glitches reported with the electronic voting machines. Isolated violent incidents take place in Kashmir, Jammu, Manipur, and Jharkhand.
8 April - The NDA's top leaders meet in New Delhi to adopt its manifesto for the elections, Agenda for Development and Good Governance.
7 April - Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Bajpayee files nomination as the candidate from his seat Lucknow.
6 April - The BJP and the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) tell the Election Commission that they will continue to raise the issue of the foreign origin of Congress president Sonia Gandhi.
4 April - An FIR is lodged against external affairs minister Yashwant Sinha for alleged violation of election code of conduct during a poll meeting in Ranchi. Besides Sinha, FIRs were lodged against three other BJP leaders who participated in the meeting. All were acquitted.


== See also ==
List of members of the 14th Lok Sabha
2004 elections in India
Election Commission of IndiaCategory:2004 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Further reading ==
Shastri, Sandeep, K.C. Suri & Yogendra Yadav (2009) (ed.). Electoral Politics in Indian States : Lok Sabha Elections in 2004 and Beyond, New Delhi : Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-806329-6


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Election Commission of India
Parliament of India
Interactive map at rediff.com
Report from Mumbai, Gujarat during 2004 election

General elections were held in India in five phases between 16 April 2009 and 13 May 2009 to elect the members of the fifteenth Lok Sabha. With a registered electorate of 716 million and a turnout of 417 million voters, it was the largest democratic election in the world until being surpassed by the 2014 general election.
By constitutional requirement, elections to the Lok Sabha must be held every five years or when Parliament is dissolved by the president. The previous elections were held in May 2004; the term of the 14th Lok Sabha would have naturally expired on 1 June 2009. The elections were organised by the Election Commission of India (ECI) and were held in multiple phases to better handle the large electorate and security concerns. In February 2009, Rs.11.20 billion ($200.5 million) was budgeted for election expenses by parliament.
A total of 8,070 candidates contested 543 seats elected in single-member constituencies using first-past-the-post voting. The National Democratic Alliance (NDA), led by the official opposition, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and the newly formed Third Front, led by Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)) and mainly constituted of regional parties, challenged the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, making the election a triangular fight. Voter turnout over all five phases was around 58%. The results of the election were announced within three days of phase five, on 16 May.
The UPA returned to government with an increased majority, with strong results in Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal; in all, there was support from 322 of the 543 elected members, including external support from the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), Samajwadi Party (SP), Janata Dal (Secular) (JD(S)), Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) and other minor parties. Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1962 to be re-elected after completing a full five-year term. He was sworn in to his second term by President Pratibha Patil on 22 May 2009 in the Ashoka Hall, Rashtrapati Bhavan. He would go on to complete a full five-year term; however, the UPA would lose to the NDA in a landslide in the next election.


== Background ==

The election, while following the normal five-year cycle, came after a break in the first UPA alliance after the left parties withdrew their support due to the Indo-US nuclear deal and forcing a vote of confidence, which Singh's government survived.


== Electoral issues ==


=== Delimitation ===

The 2009 elections adopted re-drawn electoral constituencies based on the 2001 census, following the 2002 Delimitation Commission of India, whose recommendations were approved in February 2008.
In the 2009 general elections, 499 out of the total 543 Parliamentary constituencies were newly delimited constituencies. This affected the National Capital Region of Delhi, the Union Territory of Puducherry and all the states except Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Manipur and Nagaland.
While comparing election results, it must be borne in mind that in many instances a constituency with the same name may reflect a significantly different population demographic as well as a slightly altered geographical region.


=== Electronic voting machines ===

As in the 2004 election, this election was also conducted completely using electronic voting machines (EVMs), with 1,368,430 voting machines deployed across the country.


=== Polling stations ===

There were 828,804 Polling Stations around the country – a 20% increase over the number from the 2004 election. This was done mainly to avoid vulnerability to threat and intimidation, to overcome geographical barriers and to reduce the distance travelled by voters.
The CEC announced that the polling station in Banej village in the Una segment of Junagadh, Gujarat had the unique claim to being the only polling station in the country that catered to a single elector – Guru Shree Bharatdasji Bapu, a priest of a Shiva temple in the middle of the Gir Forest.


=== Electoral rolls ===
The electoral rolls had to be completely updated because of the delimitation that took effect from February 2008. The process of updating the electoral rolls continued until the last date of filing nominations. 714 million people were eligible to vote in 2009, up 6.4% (43 million) from 2004.
This election also saw the entire country except the states of Assam, Nagaland and Jammu & Kashmir use photo electoral rolls. This meant that the photo of each elector was printed on the electoral rolls and this was intended to facilitate easy identification and prevent impersonations.
In addition to the photo electoral rolls, the electors also needed to provide separate photo identification. Those electors who had already been issued Electoral Photo Identification Cards (EPIC) were only permitted to use the EPIC for identification at the polling station. According to the EC, 82% of the country's electors (except those in Assam) have been issued EPIC before the 2009 election was announced.


== Polling schedule ==


=== Background ===
The Chief Election Commissioner of India (CEC), N. Gopalaswami, had stated on 28 December 2008, that the elections were likely to be held between April and May 2009. He attributed this schedule to the examination period from February to March, making polling places unavailable.
On 31 January 2009, fractures within the Election Commission came to the fore when Gopalaswami recommended to President Pratibha Patil that Election Commissioner Navin Chawla be sacked for behaving in a partisan manner. This recommendation in itself was controversial, as it was unclear if a CEC had the legal and constitutional right to provide such a unilateral recommendation. Chawla refused to resign as he was expected to take over the post of Chief Election Commissioner a few months later.
This controversy also resulted in speculation that the Election Commission was unable to agree on the actual polling dates, with the incumbent CEC Gopalaswami preferring that at least one phase of elections be held before his retirement on 20 April 2009. Navin Chawla, on the other hand, wanted the election to only start after Gopalaswami retired.
Eventually, on 1 March 2009, President Patil rejected Gopalaswami's recommendation to remove Chawla after the Government advised her to do so. Soon after the above announcement by President Patil, the Election Commissioners got together to announce the details of the general election.
The polling schedule for the 2009 General Elections was announced by the Chief Election Commissioner on 2 March 2009.
Subsequently, the President's House announced on 4 March 2009 that CEC Gopalaswami would retire as scheduled on 20 April 2009 and Navin Chawla would take over as CEC starting 21 April 2009. It was the first time in the history of Indian politics that two different people oversaw different phases of the same election.


=== Polling schedule ===


== Coalitions ==
The 2009 general election saw three main national pre-poll alliances. Given the volatile nature of coalition politics in India, many parties changed alliances before, during and after the elections. The two larger coalitions, UPA and NDA, had clearly indicated their prime ministerial candidates during campaigning for the election. The Third Front announced repeatedly through the campaigning period that their prime ministerial candidate would only be decided after the election results came out. In Indian parliamentary system, the announcement of Prime Ministerial candidates prior to elections is not required.


=== United Progressive Alliance ===

Prime Minister candidate: Manmohan Singh (Indian National Congress (INC))
The United Progressive Alliance (UPA) was formed after the 2004 general election to bring together parties that either allied with the Congress in various states, or were willing to support a Congress-led national government. Though the UPA never enjoyed a clear majority on its own in the 14th Lok Sabha, it managed to complete its five-year term from 2004 to 2009 by securing outside support from the left parties (CPI(M), CPI, AIFB, RSP), Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party at different times during this tenure.
Following the August 2008 confidence vote victory for the current government, a statement by Congress President Sonia Gandhi caused speculation that the UPA would project Prime Minister Manmohan Singh as the Prime Ministerial candidate in the next elections. While Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) leader M. Karunanidhi supported Manmohan Singh as the PM candidate, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar tried to project himself as a possible Prime Ministerial candidate as well. On 24 January 2009, Manmohan Singh underwent a cardiac bypass surgery at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi. Following the surgery, speculation of alternate PM candidates arose both within the Congress and amongst coalition partners. In an attempt to quell such speculations, Sonia Gandhi on 6 February 2009, confirmed that Manmohan Singh would be the UPA's PM candidate by writing so in the Congress party magazine Sandesh. This was the first time in the history of Indian elections that the Congress party had declared its Prime Ministerial candidate prior to the elections.


=== National Democratic Alliance ===

Prime Minister candidate: Lal Krishna Advani (Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP))
The National Democratic Alliance (NDA) was the first large national coalition formed by a national party supported by various regional parties. It was formed after the 1998 general election and the NDA formed the Government led by BJP's Atal Bihari Vajpayee. The government collapsed a few months later, but the NDA returned to power after the 1999 general election and this time the Vajpayee-led Government completed its full term from 1999 to 2004. Due to the volatile nature of coalitions, NDA won 181 seats after the 2004 election, but due to parties changing alliances, before the 2009 election they had 142 seats.
The main opposition party, BJP, and its NDA coalition partners announced on 11 December 2007 (more than a year before the election) that their candidate for prime minister would be BJP party leader Advani who was the Leader of the Opposition at the time. On 23 January 2008, leaders from BJP and other NDA parties convened in the capital to officially elect him as their candidate for the election.


=== Third Front ===
Seats: The newly formed alliance carried with them 109 seats before the 2009 election.
The CPI(M) led the formation of the Third Front for the 2009 election. This front was basically a collection of regional political parties who were neither in UPA nor in the NDA.


=== Fourth Front ===
Seats: The newly formed alliance carried with them 64 seats before the 2009 election.
The Samajwadi Party, Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Lok Janshakti Party failed to reach seat sharing agreements with the Congress and decided to form a new front, hoping to be kingmakers after the election. Despite announcing this front, the constituent parties continued to declare their support for the UPA.


== Campaign ==


=== United Progressive Alliance ===
The Congress party bought the rights for the Oscar-winning soundtrack "Jai Ho" from the movie Slumdog Millionaire, which was used as the official campaign tune by the party. The song title "Jai Ho" translates to 'Let there be victory', and the Congress hoped that the popular song would galvanise the masses during the almost one-month-long election season.
On 24 March 2009, Congress President Sonia Gandhi released the party's manifesto for the 2009 election. The manifesto highlighted all the achievements of the UPA Government over the last five years in power and identified improving various policies to favour more rural & under-privileged sections of the Indian society.
The Congress campaign ran into trouble when the Election Commission took exception to a full page advertisement on the 2010 Commonwealth Games taken out in major Delhi newspapers. The EC served notice to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, the Cabinet Secretary and the Chief Secretary of Delhi, stating that the advertisement was a clear violation of the model code of conduct since it enumerated the achievements of the UPA Government. The EC has also asked the violators to pay from their own pockets.


=== National Democratic Alliance ===
To counter the Congress' selection of "Jai Ho" as their official anthem, the BJP coined the phrase Kushal Neta,
On 3 April 2009, BJP released its election manifesto in New Delhi. The party was taking on the incumbent UPA Government on the three fronts of Good Governance, Development and Security. The manifesto highlighted all the different NDA policies that the UPA reversed over the last five years. The manifesto laid a lot of importance on requiring strong, POTA-like anti-terrorism laws and vowed to make India a safer place if the BJP is elected. The full text of the manifesto is available at the BJP website.
The BJP campaign faced its biggest controversy when the EC directed the District Magistrate of Pilibhit to lodge a criminal case against the BJP's candidate Varun Gandhi for his allegedly inflammatory speech against minority communities made on 7 March 2009. This decision was taken after the EC had earlier issued a notice to Varun Gandhi and the BJP. After reviewing the incident, the EC found Varun Gandhi guilty of violating the model code of conduct by creating feeling of enmity and hatred between different communities and issued a recommendation the BJP to drop him from their list of candidates. The BJP however came out in support of Varun and refused to drop him as a candidate.


=== Third Front ===
The Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)) formed a Third Front. The Third Front tried to contest the election, hoping to create a non-BJP, non-Congress government, by attracting many local and regional parties, that were once with the other two alliances. The Third Front came into the alliance with 109 MPs, and various polling conducted before the election projected the alliance of getting over 100 seats. The CPI(M) created a campaign website hosting its campaign information to attract sympathisers among the netizen public to vote for the party.


=== Innovative technology usage during campaigning ===
During this election, political parties used technology in innovative ways to reach out to the voters. Although SMS had been used during prior elections, political parties had realised that the rural and illiterate voters which form a majority could not read. Young and technology savvy politicians quickly realised that voice was the way to reach out to the rural community as they could speak their language. This turned out to be very interesting as two voice companies from India, TringMe and VoiceHawk played the pivotal role in reaching out to the billion people of India.


== Opinion polling ==
Most opinion polls conducted by major agencies gave the UPA an edge over the NDA, but none were predicted to get absolute majority. The UPA including the Fourth front was, however, predicted by a few to get seats close to majority. The opinion polls reckoned that other regional parties would play an important role by winning a substantial number of seats. In results where the "Fourth Front" is indicated, the SP, RJD and LJP are not being counted in the UPA figure.


=== Pre-poll surveys ===


=== Exit polls ===
In February 2009, the ECI banned the publishing of all exit polls starting 48 hours before Phase 1 of the election until the end of Phase 5. This was intended to prevent exit polls from earlier phases affecting voter decisions in later phases. The ban ended with the close of Phase 5 voting at 5:00 pm IST on 13 May.


== Election phases ==


=== Phase 1 – 16 April 2009 ===
The first phase of the 2009 election took place on Thursday, 16 April with elections in 124 constituencies across 15 states and 2 union territories. There were incidents of violence in a few places in Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand and Maharashtra and between 17 and 19 people were killed in Naxal attacks. The dead included five poll officials and 10 security personnel, whose families received a compensation of Rs 1 million. Naxals set fire to voting machines, attacked voters, security personnel and polling workers, and destroyed vehicles. According to one news source, "It was apparent that the Naxals had clearly planned to disrupt the polls."
Despite these incidents, the ECI expressed satisfaction about the conduct of the polls due to peaceful polling in many other parts of the country. Initial reports from the ECI place the voter turnout for this phase at approximately 60 percent. This phase of the election was held in 185,000 polling stations, serving an electorate of over 143.1 million deciding the fate of 1,715 candidates.
The ECI ordered repoll in 46 polling booths across 7 of the states where polling took place in the first phase. These include 29 polling booths in Andhra Pradesh, 5 each in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, 3 in Nagaland, 2 in Kerala and 1 each in Jammu & Kashmir and Uttar Pradesh. The repoll in all these polling booths were held on 18 April 2009.
One of the positive stories emerging from this phase of election was from Kandhamal district, where refugees of the 2008 Kandhamal riots came out in huge numbers to exercise their franchise. It is estimated that there was a turnout of 90% amongst Kandhamal refugees and 50% across the entire district. The administration had earlier identified large parts of the area as Naxal affected and vulnerable. Hence, the administration had deployed extra security in the area and the ECI has arranged for special transport to shuttle the refugees from the refugee camps to the polling booths. Both of these actions helped achieve the high turnout.


=== Phase 2 – 22 April 2009 and 23 April 2009 ===
The second phase of the 2009 election was spread across Wednesday, 22 April (Phase 2A) and Thursday, 23 April (Phase 2B). Phase 2A saw election in a single constituency in Manipur as it was a state holiday on 23 April.
According to the EC, the election in Manipur in Phase 2A was peaceful and witnessed a voter turnout of about 62%. Following the election, though, the Communist Party of India (CPI) and Manipur People's Party (MPP) have alleged vote rigging by Congress workers during the polls in Phase 2A. The MPP claimed that the Congress workers captured 11 booths in the Andro Assembly segment of Imphal East.
Phase 2B saw polling in 12 states for 140 constituencies – the most in any phase of this election. This phase was largely peaceful and saw about 55% turnout. There were stray incidents of violence in areas with active Naxalite groups in Jharkhand and Bihar. The poor turnout in this phase was blamed on a heat wave sweeping the country that took the noon-time temperature on election day up to between 42 and 46 degrees Celsius in various parts of the country. Two polling officials even died due to sun stroke in Orissa with two also falling ill.


=== Phase 3 – 30 April 2009 ===
The third phase of the 2009 election was held on Thursday, 30 April with elections in 107 constituencies spread across nine states and two union territories. The fate of 1,567 candidates was decided in this phase including those of Congress President Sonia Gandhi, BJP's Prime Minister candidate L.K. Advani and former Prime Minister and Janata Dal (Secular) President Deve Gowda. This phase included voting in Mumbai where the turnout was relatively low. The voter turnout around the country was moderate and this was primarily blamed on the extreme heat on election day. Voting was largely peaceful all across the country. However, Maoist guerrillas exploded a landmine in West Bengal's Purulia district, injuring a paramilitary trooper.


=== Phase 4 – 7 May 2009 ===

The fourth phase of the election was held on Thursday, 7 May with elections for 85 seats across eight states involving 1,315 candidates. The phase's high-profile candidates included External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee and former chief ministers Mulayam Singh Yadav, Rajnath Singh, Lalu Prasad Yadav and Farooq Abdullah. Apart from bomb attacks in West Bengal's Asansol and Murshidabad districts that killed one person each and some violence in Rajasthan, this phase was relatively peaceful. This phase saw voting in the nation's capital Delhi where the voter turnout was around 53%, much higher than the previous two elections in Delhi.


=== Phase 5 – 13 May 2009 ===
The fifth and final phase of the 2009 election was held on Wednesday, 13 May with voting across seven states and two union territories for 86 constituencies. Overall the turnout was 62%. Numerous cases of voter omissions were reported in Tamil Nadu which had 39 seats up for grab. In Jammu & Kashmir, two polling stations could not be reached by the polling officials due to extreme snow which prevented their helicopters from landing at the site. The polling officials were forced to trek through deep snow to reach the polling stations and polls took place 2 days later on 15 May in these two stations. A few cases of violence were also reported in this phase. One DMK official was stabbed to death in Tamil Nadu in a clash between the political parties and another person was killed in West Bengal in clashes between Trinamool Congress and CPI(M) party workers.


== State/UT-wise voter turnout details ==


== Results ==

Vote counting took place on 16 May and the result were declared the same day. The EVMs were localised to 1,080 centres across the country and counting started at 08:00 hrs. The United Progressive Alliance (UPA) took early lead and maintained it to emerge victorious. Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Rajnath Singh said that the BJP's performance in the election was very unexpected and the success of the NDA that had been hoped for had not materialised. The CPI (M) led third front later said that it was ready to sit in the opposition.


=== By Region ===


=== By states and territories ===

The UPA carried 18 states, while the NDA and the Third Front carried 8 and 2 respectively.
Source: Election Commission of India


== Reactions ==
President of Bharatiya Janata Party, Rajnath Singh conceded defeat on behalf of his party after seeing the trends of vote counting on the day of result.


== Analysis ==
This election defied the predictions made by pre-poll predictions and exit polls and resulted in a new mandate for incumbent UPA government. According to analysts after the election, many factors can be attributed for a landslide. The National Election Study 2009, published in The Hindu newspaper after the election, attributed the victory of the UPA government to the saturation of caste-based identity politics, focus on good governance and BJP's limitations. Another factor was the vote-splitting by the Third Front, especially the BSP and MNS in Maharashtra, which resulted in the Indian National Congress gaining many of its seats without getting a majority in the corresponding constituency.


== Formation of the new government ==

The President, Pratibha Patil dissolved the 14th Lok Sabha with immediate effect on 18 May. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh submitted the resignation of his Council of Ministers to the President, for him to be re-elected as the Prime Minister as well as for a new Council of Ministers to be elected. On 19 May, Manmohan Singh and Sonia Gandhi were re-elected as party leader and chairperson respectively of the Congress Parliamentary Party. This effectively made him the prime minister-elect of the new government. President Pratibha Patil invited Singh to then form the new government on 20 May. The new government was sworn in on 22 May.


=== Government formation ===
Due to the fact that UPA was able to get 262 seats – just short of 10 seats for a majority – all the external support came from parties who gave unconditional support to Manmohan Singh and the UPA. The Janata Dal, the Rashtriya Janata Dal, the Bahujan Samaj Party and the Samajwadi Party all decided to do so to keep out any possibility of a BJP government in the next 5 years. Nagaland Peoples Front, Sikkim Democratic Front, and Bodaland Peoples Front, each with an MP, decided to join and support the UPA government. The three independent candidates to extend support for UPA were all from Maharashtra, and they were Sadashiv Mandlik, from Kolhapur constituency, Raju Shetty, from the political party Swabhimani Paksha, who won from Hatkandagle and Baliram Jadhav from Bahujan Vikas Aghadi party who won the Palghar constituency.
On 21 May, it was announced that the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) had decided to leave and give outside support to the UPA government, due to failed talks between the Congress and the DMK on cabinet positions. After many deliberations between DMK and Congress, the DMK agreed to 3 cabinet ministers and 4 ministers of state. Kanimozhi, daughter of the DMK leader M. Karunanidhi, decided not to join the new government cabinet, instead she wanted to focus on improving the parties image. The two incumbent cabinet ministers from DMK, Dayanidhi Maran and A. Raja joined the cabinet, but due to concerns raised by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on T.R. Baalu, he was dropped from the cabinet, and Karunanidhi's son M.K. Azhagiri, replaced him as part of a compromise. On 25 May 2009, DMK decided to join the UPA government, reversing the decision made in prior days to extend outside support.


== See also ==
List of members of the 15th Lok Sabha
2009 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Lok Sabha General Elections 2019 – Parliamentary Polls 2019 India News Archived 25 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Official website of the Election Commission of India
News websites
News Coverages of General Elections 2009 – NDTV
Graphical Representation of General Elections 2009 for All States in India – NationsRoot
News Coverages of General Elections 2009 – CNN-IBN
News Coverages of General Elections 2009 – Sify
Information About India Elections
News Coverages of General Elections – Wionews
Archived websites
Indian General Elections 2009 Web Archive from the US Library of Congress


== Further reading ==
Arora, Balveer & Tawa Lama-Rewal, Stéphanie (eds). Contests in Context: Indian Elections 2009. South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal. Issue 3, 2009.

The 2012 SCO summit was the 12th annual summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation.


== Background ==
At the previous summit in Kazakhstan, new rules in regards to the admission of more member states were discussed, with the details expected to be clarified at this summit.


== Attending delegations ==
The heads of state of the six countries participated in the summit.

The other state delegations are led by:

The Putin-led Russian delegation included: Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and five other cabinet ministers and the head of Gazprom, Viktor Zubkov, as well from other energy companies. The delegation was welcomed by Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Zhijun.


== Agenda ==
The agenda included discussions about the Syrian uprising and criticism by the Western world of Russia and China's approach towards sanctioning the government of Syria. Host Chinese leader Hu Jintao also said that the SCO would support a security paradigm that would give its member states sovereignty over what is deemed to be its own interests in accordance with individual state's conditions. It also sought to counter "interventionism."

Rules for the admission of further member states were expected to be issued. Turkey was considered for admission as a "dialogue partner" and Afghanistan joined as an "observer." China did not object to either states citing their status as "NATO-friendly countries." Afghanistan is already currently involved as part of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, which is working on reconstruction projects in the country. However, Vice Foreign Minister Cheng Guoping said the observers were unlikely to become full members as yet due to expectations for more "preparatory work," though the current members would maintain an "open attitude" towards future relations:The relevant countries should work hard towards political, legal and technical preparations for [membership]. The relevant work is going on about expansion of membership. The decision should be made through consensus and consultation, and no timetable should be set. That is to say, when the conditions are ripe, the decision should be made through consensus. The founding ethos for the SCO, counter-terrorism, was also expected to be high on the agenda.
Other issues suggested for discussion were a bigger role for SCO after NATO withdraws its forces following the War in Afghanistan (which could be enhanced by Afghanistan's acceptance as an observer) and in working towards a solution to Iran's nuclear programme, for which a statement criticising further international sanctions would be issued. Cheng also said that a road transport agreement would be signed, while discussions would continue in order to develop a financing safeguard mechanism and an SCO development bank.


=== Non-member initiatives ===
India sought to work with the Uzbekistan-based Regional Counter-Terrorism Structure, participate in discussions with the other trade ministers and coordinate its own work with the SCO over reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan, more so after the announced phased withdrawal of ISAF troops from that country, in what Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov called the "economic and political revival of Afghanistan."


== Schedule ==
On 6 June, a group meeting between the six member states was scheduled in Beijing. The next day a larger meeting, business summit and a signing ceremony to conclude the summit was scheduled.


== Discussions ==
At the start of the summit, Hu said: "We will continue to manage regional affairs by ourselves, guarding against shocks from turbulence outside the region. We will play a bigger role in Afghanistan's peaceful reconstruction. We'll strengthen communication, co-ordination and co-operation in dealing with major international and regional issues."


=== Conclusions ===
Host leader Hu Jintao announced the conclusions to the summit as including:

Afghanistan and Turkey were included in the roles they were expected to have done as observer and dialogue partner, respectively.
Vows to foster and facilitate trade and investment.
Vows to enhance cooperation in the finance, transportation, energy, telecommunications and agriculture sectors in line with a furtherance of regional economic development
Pursue the establishment of a Special Account and Development Bank.
Approval of a development strategic plan.
Vows to increase capacity to deal with crises situations such as terrorism, separatism, extremism and transnational crime and make the SCO a "reliable guarantor of regional security."
Agreement on the necessity to enhance cultural and educational exchanges and create opportunities for more people-to-people contact.
Further cooperation with observer states and dialogue partners, the United Nations and other affiliates, including international and regional organisations.
There were also ten agreements that were signed, including the Declaration on Building a Region with Lasting Peace and Common Prosperity, the Strategic Plan for the Medium-Term Development of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, as well as agreeing to unify the SCO's response to regional security threats. Hu then further told the summit delegations that "we should enhance consultations with international and regional organizations through the platform to safeguard peace, promote development and boost world multipolarization and democratization of international relations." Kyrgyzstan then took over the rotating presidency of the organisation the next day.


== Bilateral meetings ==
The day prior to the commencement of the summit featured Russian President Vladimir Putin and host Chinese leader Hu Jintao present for the signing of bilateral cooperation agreements in the fields of energy, industry, innovation technologies and tourism, as well an agreement to deepen China-Russia relations and strategic cooperation. Putin was scheduled to meet China's chairman of the Committee of the National People's Congress Wu Bangguo, Premier Wen Jiabao, Vice President Xi Jinping and Vice Premier Li Keqiang. Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that Putin decision to come to China as part of one of his foreign visits as president was indicative of burgeoning relations between the two countries. China's Wen Jiabao met Kyrgyz President Almazbek Atambayev and discussed Kyrgyzstani stability and development. Wen said that the two states would work towards developing infrastructure in railways, energy and trade relations with an increase in the exchange of persons between the two countries. Atambayev added that he appreciated China's support and that Kyrgyzstan was working to enhance cooperation with China in the spheres trade, transportation, energy, agriculture and security. Hu also met Kazakhstan's Nursultan Nazarbayev with him whom he pledged to enhance their "strategic partnership." Nazarbayev also met Jinping. The same pledges were made by Hu with Tajikistan's Emomali Rahmon, specifically in the sectors of energy, resources, infrastructure, agriculture and security. Rahmon also said that China National Petroleum Corporation was invited to explore for both crude oil and natural gas in Tajikistan following the signing of an agreement on 5 June. He also signed an agreement with China for a US#50 million loan for a road construction project, as well as inviting Zijin Mining Group Company Limited to explore for copper.
Afghan President Hamid Karzai said that Afghanistan and China would sign a preliminary agreement for the "creation of a strategic partnership" and work towards deepening relations. Putin was also scheduled to meet with his Iranian and Afghani counterparts. The latter two would also hold talks with their Chinese counterpart. Indian Foreign Minister S. M. Krishna is scheduled to meet Chinese Vice-Premier Li Keqiang to discuss border issues and the incarceration of Indian nationals in China.


== Reactions ==
Al Jazeera asked if the budding relationship between China and Russia would be akin to a "NATO of the east."


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website
Putin's expectations for the summit – Printed in Renmin Ribao Daily.
2012 Beijing Summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Archived 9 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine – by Xinhua.

The 2014 SCO summit  was the 13th annual summit of heads of state of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation held between 11 and 12 September in Dushanbe, Tajikistan. Security was among the top issues for 13th annual summit and all members during the last meeting reached a consensus on fighting against separatism, extremism and terrorism, as well as on safeguarding regional peace and security therefore Afghanistan will be focal point during talks in Dushanbe, claim some diplomats of member countries.


== Background ==
In the build-up to the summit, a foreign ministers meeting was held on 30 July. It was hosted by Sirodjidin Aslov and was also attended by Secretary-General Dmitry Mezentsev of Russia. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov offered assistance in stabilising the border with Afghanistan. In the final communique, Aslov said:At the meeting we approved the draft resolution of the Council of Heads of State 'On the SCO Draft Development Strategy until 2025,' which will determine the guidelines for future interaction and improve our action efficiency. The current meeting’s peculiarity is that the work on the coordination and preparation of legal documents on the admission of new members is actually on the homestretch. The delegations' heads have approved draft procedures for the granting of SCO member status and a new version of the model memorandum on the obligations of applicant states, seeking the SCO member state status.
Military exercises will commence on 24 August, scheduled to be the biggest in 10 years. A joint anti-terrorist drill was also held in China from 24 to 29 August with about 7,000 troops including over 200 Tajiks, over 480 Kyrgyz who were the first to arrive. By 12, August, over 1,000 non-Chinese soldiers and officers were headed to Inner Mongolia via road, rail and air. There were also 12 Russian aircraft in the exercise.
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi also visited Dushanbe about a month before the summit, as did Uzbek Foreign Minister Abdulaziz Kamilov. The corresponding heads of government meeting will take place in December in Astana, Kazakhstan.


== Attending delegations ==
The heads of state of the six countries participated in the summit.

The other state delegations are led by:


== Agenda ==
India, Iran, Pakistan and Mongolia were due to become a full member at the 11–12 September summit, thereby upgrading their observer member status. The decision was made at the foreign ministers meeting earlier in the year. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi was told of China acceptance of expansion at the 6th BRICS summit.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website

General elections were held in India in nine phases from 7 April to 12 May 2014 to elect the members of the 16th Lok Sabha. With 834 million registered voters, they were the largest-ever elections in the world until being surpassed by the 2019 election. Around 23.1 million or 2.71% of the total eligible voters were aged 18–19 years. A total of 8,251 candidates contested the 543 elected Lok Sabha seats. The average election turnout over all nine phases was around 66.44%, the highest ever in the history of Indian general elections until the 2019 election.
The results were declared on 16 May, 15 days before the 15th Lok Sabha completed its constitutional mandate on 31 May 2014. The counting exercise was held at 989 counting centers. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) received 31% of the vote and won 282 seats, while its National Democratic Alliance (NDA) won a total of 336 seats. Although the Indian National Congress (INC)  was defeated by a landslide, the BJP's vote share was the lowest by a party winning a majority of seats since independence,  The BJP won 31.2% votes, while NDA's combined vote share was 38.5%. However, the governing coalition had the largest majority since the 1984 elections, and it was the first time since 1984 that a party had won enough seats to govern without the support of other parties.
In contrast, the result was the worst-ever performance by the Indian National Congress (INC), which had ruled India for most of its post-independence history. The INC received 19.3% of the vote and won only 44 seats, with its wider alliance, the United Progressive Alliance, winning a total of just 59. In order to become the official opposition party in India, a party must have 55 seats; as a result, there was no official opposition party.


== Background ==
As per the requirements of the Indian Constitution, elections to the Lok Sabha must be held at an interval of five years or whenever parliament is dissolved by the president. The previous election, to the 15th Lok Sabha, was conducted in April–May 2009, and its term would have naturally expired on 31 May 2014. The election to the 16th Lok Sabha was organised and conducted by the Election Commission of India (ECI) and was held in multiple phases, to better handle the large electoral base and security concerns.
Since the last general election in 2009, the anti-corruption movement by Anna Hazare, and other similar moves by Baba Ramdev and Arvind Kejriwal (founder of Aam Aadmi Party), gathered momentum and political interest. Kejriwal went on to form a separate political party, Aam Aadmi Party, in November 2012. The 2012 presidential election resulted in Pranab Mukherjee of Indian National Congress becoming the president.  Andhra politics was further shaken following the death of its chief minister, Y. S. Rajasekhara Reddy. His son, Y. S. Jaganmohan Reddy, then broke from the INC and founded the YSR Congress Party, taking several politicians with him.
The final session of parliament started on 6 February and ended on 21 February. Amongst the agenda in the final session was passing The Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 in tackling corruption and the creation of Telangana.


== Organisation ==


=== Spending limit ===
The Cabinet of India revised the limit of election expenditure by a candidate for parliamentary constituencies to ₹7 million (US$73,000) in bigger states and to ₹5.4 million (US$57,000) in smaller states and all union territories except Delhi. This revision of the ceiling on the elections were attributed to the increase in the number of electors and polling stations as well as the increase in the cost inflation index.


=== Accessibility ===
Satyendra Singh, a doctor with a disability, showed the lack of preparedness by the Election Commission of India (ECI) towards electors with disabilities through the Right to Information Act. The Chief Electoral Officer in Delhi, Vijay Dev then started a campaign on providing accessibility for the disabled, along with him. Singh conducted sensitisation workshops for election officers and helped in setting up a registration link for voters with disabilities to register to vote and provide their requirements.


== Election schedule ==
The Chief Election Commissioner of India (CEC), V. S. Sampath, announced the polling schedule on 5 March. Voting was scheduled to be held in nine phases from 7 April to 12 May, and the results of the election were announced on 16 May. Simultaneous elections were held for the Vidhan Sabha of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha, Telangana and Sikkim.


== Campaign ==


=== Issues ===
Important issues during the campaign included high inflation, lack of jobs, economic slow down, corruption, security and terrorism, religious division and communalism, and infrastructure such as roads, electricity and water. In a survey by Zee News, inflation was indicated to be the main issue in the election.


==== Economy ====
Bloomberg highlighted India's slowing economy amidst a record high current account deficit and a falling rupee in summer 2013. It pointed out a lack of infrastructure investment and a government increasingly likely to give subsidies that the national finances cannot afford just before the election. Other points it mentioned were stagnant policymaking and an inefficient bureaucracy. The economy was the main issue in the campaign. The lack of a clear mandate as a result of the election could lead to an increase in the price of gold in the country. Modi also brought up the issue of farmer suicides that resulted from high debt and poor yield on their crops. Former Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha criticised the incumbent Chidambaram in saying that he had a "habit that he will get a strong economy, and he will ruin it before he leaves... Shri Chidambaram will be remembered in history as a spoiler, as someone who specialises in sub-five per cent growth rate, for his hubris, arrogance".


==== Price rise ====
The price of onions, a staple in Indian cuisine, faced a dramatic increase. In the lead up to the election, consumer price inflation increased more than expected while, paradoxically, industrial production fell by more than expected, causing a dilemma amid slowing growth. The price of salt was also indicative of general food inflation.


==== Corruption ====

During the UPA-2 government, a number of scams came to public attention, deteriorating the image of the government among the common man. These scams included coal scam, 2G spectrum case, AgustaWestland Chopper scam and CWG scam.


=== Celebrity candidates ===
Celebrity candidates from non-political spheres were nominated in the election. These included: Raj Babbar (INC), Bhaichung Bhutia (AITC), Biswajit Chatterjee (AITC), Sandhya Roy (AITC), Smriti Irani (BJP), Jaaved Jaaferi (AAP), Prakash Jha (JD(U)), Mohammad Kaif (INC), Kamaal Rashid Khan (SP), Vinod Khanna (BJP), Ravi Kishan (INC), Kirron Kher (BJP), Bappi Lahiri (BJP), Hema Malini (BJP), Mahesh Manjrekar (MNS), Bhagwant Mann (AAP), Nandan Nilekani (INC), Gul Panag (AAP), Jaya Prada (RLD), Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore (BJP), Paresh Rawal (BJP), Rakhi Sawant (RAP), Indranil Sen (AITC), Moon Moon Sen (AITC), Vijay Kumar Singh (BJP), Shatrughan Sinha (BJP), P. C. Sorcar Jr. (BJP), Babul Supriyo (BJP), Manoj Tiwari (BJP), Innocent Vincent (LDF-IND), Nagma (INC), Dev (AITC), and Siddhanta Mahapatra (BJD).


== Parties and alliances ==


=== National Democratic Alliance ===

The constituents of the National Democratic Alliance and the seats they contested and won are shown at the right in the table:
The NDA garnered an overwhelming number of 336 seats in this election. This has propelled it to form the government in the country.


==== Bharatiya Janata Party ====
Organisation
Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi was appointed to lead the Bharatiya Janata Party's campaign after a party conclave in Goa. This came amid controversy as L. K. Advani opposed the decision and resigned from his party posts, only to later rescind his resignation. Advani proposed Shivaraj Chouhan as prime ministerial candidate and compared him with Vajpayee. Murli Manohar Joshi and Sushma Swaraj were part of the team for the campaign. Rajnath Singh, Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Advani were the mentors for the BJP's campaign. A 12-member committee, led by Modi, was appointed at the Goa conclave which included M. Venkaiah Naidu, Nitin Gadkari, Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan, Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Raman Singh and Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar.

Key leader's constituencies
Modi contested the election from Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh and Vadodara in Gujarat. In Varanasi, the sizeable Muslim minority population was viewed by the media as an important voter target and the BJP's minority cell leader Salim Mohommad took part in campaigning. Advani wanted to contest from Bhopal but later agreed to contest again from his incumbent seat Gandhinagar. He also rejected a proposal to be appointed to the Rajya Sabha in favour of running in the election. Advani was given the Gandhinagar seat because Modi wanted him to contest from Gujarat, according to Rajnath Singh. 
Arun Jaitley contested for the Lok Sabha for the first time (having previously been a Rajya Sabha member) from Amritsar against former Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh. The move was controversial as incumbent MP from Amritsar Navjot Singh Sidhu was unhappy in not being allocated the constituency. Yet he said that as Jaitley was his "guru" he would accept the decision, but would not run from any other constituency. The reason for not allocating the ticket to Sidhu was said to be because of his spat with the Shiromani Akali Dal Punjab Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal and party President Sukhbir Singh Badal, as well as other BJP personnel. Jaswant Singh was denied nomination from Barmer constituency so he decided instead to contest the seat as an independent.

Campaign and Issues

The BJP released its manifesto on 7 April 2014. The party promised to set up a Price Stabilisation Fund and to evolve a single 'National Agriculture Market' to check price rise and go for e-Governance, policy-driven governance and simplification of the tax regime to prevent corruption. It wanted to encourage labour-intensive manufacturing, focus on traditional employment bases of agriculture, the upgrade of infrastructure and housing and self-employment opportunities for job creation. Harnessing satellite technology; setting up National Optical-Fibre Network up to the village level; Diamond Quadrilateral project – of High Speed Train network were among several other things that the party promised.
The Himachal Pradesh BJP attacked the UPA's "one rank, one pension" scheme as an "election stunt", according to the convenor of the BJP's ex-servicemen cell, Brigadier (Retired) Lal Chand Jaswal. The move followed the BJP raising the issue in the previous years and Modi's announcement at an ex-servicemen's rally at Rewari on 15 September 2013 and at Sujanpur on 17 February. Modi also criticised the INC and Rahul Gandhi for giving a ticket to former Maharashtra Chief Minister Ashok Chavan despite his indictment in the Adarsh Housing Society scam in Mumbai. He further criticised Gandhi's comments about his governance of Gujarat at rally in Bijapur. At a rally in Gurgaon, Haryana, part of the wider National Capital Region, Modi said: "People gave ruling Congress 60 years, I just need 60 months to prove that the BJP is the best option for India" and alleged that the INC was protecting Robert Vadra, the son-in-law of Sonia Gandhi, after he was said to have "sold farmers land" and made money. "Robert Vadra's empty bank account was credited with $8.30m (Rs 500 million) in just three months. BJP wants answers". He also criticised the INC's Nandan Nilekani as he had "squandered crores of rupees in giving a unique identity (Aadhaar) to millions of people, which even the Supreme Court questioned, as it did not address the security concerns."
Amongst the social media, individuals came up with satirical takes on sports, movies (in Hindi and English) and songs, amongst other things, in support of the BJP campaign slogan that were premised on "Aab ki baar, Modi sarkar" ([This time, [we will have a] Modi government]). Modi was noted for focusing, in his rallies across the country, on the 23 million first-time come-of-age voters. By the last day of campaigning on 10 May, Narendra Modi had undertaken the largest mass outreach in India's electoral history by travelling about 300,000 km for 437 public meetings in 25 states and 1350 innovative 3D rallies according to the BJP.
In regards to foreign relations of India, Modi, in a rally in Arunachal Pradesh, a state which borders China with a history of border disputes, swore to protect the country and criticised "Chinese expansionism." He also highlighted the importance of diplomats discussing issues like trade facilitation and promoting Indian business abroad.


==== Others ====
Lok Janshakti Party
Lok Janshakti Party leader Ram Vilas Paswan announced on 30 January that the LJP, RJD and INC will jointly contest the election from Bihar's constituencies. He later announced on 27 February that he will instead join the NDA. LJP contested polls with the BJP and Rashtriya Lok Samata Party (RLSP) on 40 seats with 30 seats for BJP, three seats for RLSP and seven seats for LJP. LJP and RLSP won all the seats allotted to them with BJP winning 22 seats. The election was seen by many BJP leaders as a show of strength after fallout with JD(U). After the election results, Nitish Kumar was forced to resign from the post of Chief Minister after being marginalised to just 2 seats.

Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam
Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam (DMDK), led by Tamil film actor Vijayakanth joined the NDA on 26 February.

Lok Satta Party
On 10 April, while campaigning in Telangana, Jayaprakash Narayan of the Lok Satta Party stated that while his party had a few differences of opinion with the BJP manifesto, they had decided to support the NDA in the "national interest". On the other hand, Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan contested from the Malkajgiri. Malkajgiri had 2,953,915 eligible voters in the election making it the largest parliamentary constituency of the country in terms of number of voters.

Shiv Sena, Swabhimani Paksha and Rashtriya Samaj Paksha
The Swabhimani Paksha (SWP) a political party of Swabhimani Shetkari Saghtana (SSS) joined the Shiv Sena-BJP-Republican Party of India (A) alliance in February. The SSS, which represents the interests of farmers in western Maharashtra was offered two seats – Madha in Solapur, where NCP leader Sharad Pawar sits, and Hathkanangale, the seat of SSS leader Raju Shetti. Shetti also sought Baramati but this was rejected by the Shiv Sena and BJP, who decided to leave a seat each from their quotas of 22 and 26 to accommodate SSS. Rashtriya Samaj Paksha also joined the alliance in January. In addition to the aforementioned four parties that were contesting from Maharashtra, RSP was also in the alliance.

Shiromani Akali Dal
Shiromani Akali Dal contested 10 out of 13 seats in Punjab.


=== United Progressive Alliance ===

The constituents of the United Progressive Alliance and the seats they contested and won are shown at the right in the table:
This election turned out to be an unprecedented disaster for the UPA as they garnered the lowest number of seats in their history.

In March, the INC, RJD and NCP announced that they would jointly contest in Bihar. The INC contested 12 seats, NCP fought on 1 seat and the RJD, being a regional party, would seek the rest of 27 seats.


==== Indian National Congress ====
The Indian National Congress had announced, on the fourth anniversary of the second United Progressive Alliance government, that its campaign for the election would be led by incumbent Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, INC chairperson Sonia Gandhi and general secretary Rahul Gandhi. Rahul Gandhi was appointed to head a six-member committee to formulate and implement alliances, the party manifesto and general publicity for the election.
In response to sagging opinion poll numbers for the general election, the INC sought to fast-track a decision on separating Telangana from Andhra Pradesh, create a coalition government with the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha and the Rashtriya Janata Dal in Jharkhand, sought to take credit for the Food Security Bill and passing Land Acquisition Bill.

Prime Minister candidate
Incumbent Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said that he would not return to his role should the INC get a majority or plurality. Rahul Gandhi told Dainik Bhaskar that he was "ready to take charge" of any responsibility the party gave him and he added that: "My focus for India is a long term vision, where all Indians are treated with equality, respect and are given equal opportunities." At the party meeting it was decided not to name a prime ministerial candidate amid fears it would turn the election into a presidential one. This was criticised by the BJP. Sonia Gandhi would instead lead the party's campaign. He also called the election a turning point. Sonia Gandhi then said that the party will face upcoming challenges and the election with a "lot of determination;" she added that the election would be a battle for India. "Divisive forces are stretching social fabric to breaking point. Opposition's way is to spread disharmony. There's a face hidden behind the mask of compassion."

Rahul Gandhi
In January, in an interview, Gandhi admitted that some Congress members may have been involved in the 1984 anti-Sikh riots and further stated that Modi's government was responsible for pushing the 2002 riots while the Congress government in 1984 tried to stop the anti Sikh riots. Praful Patel, a fellow UPA member said that the 2002 matter should be put to rest. As Gandhi was reported to have sought an early declaration of the party's candidates, the INC was scheduled to hold its first meeting of the central election committee on 13 February to finalise all their candidates by the end of the month. Similarly, the screening committees for several unnamed part of the country had already occurred so as to shortlist the candidates. On 8 March, its list of 194 candidates was announced, including 35% of candidates that were below the age of 50 years. The INC was reported to be concerned by the possibility of a reduced mandate in Gandhi's seat of Amethi (Lok Sabha constituency) amidst an unusual challenge by his high-profile competitor, the BJP's Smriti Irani. It even led to his mother, Sonia, campaigning there for the first time in 10 years.

Opinion polls
The INC dismissed the opinion polls pointing to a NDA plurality as misleading and partisan. In its manifesto the party promised "inclusive growth" and that it would initiate a raft of welfare schemes, including a right to healthcare for all and pensions for the aged and disabled. Manmohan Singh, Sonia and Rahul Gandhi's INC campaigning included scheduled stops in Odisha and, on 20 April, in Maharashtra prior to the third phase. Rahul Gandhi claimed in a rally in Chhattisgarh that Modi would "divide the nation into pieces, and make people fight against each other."

Media
During the election, former prime ministerial aide Sanjaya Baru published "The Accidental Prime Minister: The Making and Unmaking of Manmohan Singh" in which he criticised Singh as not being fully in charge of his government, and having to compete with the dynastic Congress leader, Sonia Gandhi, for influence within his own cabinet. Singh's office retorted in saying it is "smacks of fiction and coloured views of a former adviser." After Baru said "it is no secret that Sonia Gandhi was the super prime minister," Priyanka Gandhi replied "I think Manmohan Singh ji is the super PM."


==== Others ====
Jammu & Kashmir National Conference
Minister for New and Renewable Energy and Jammu & Kashmir National Conference chairman Farooq Abdullah, controversially, told a rally in Srinagar that in regards to Modi becoming prime minister "if it happens then Kashmir will not remain a part of India. I say it publicly. Kashmiris will not accept a communal person". He added before going to a scheduled rally in Magam that "those who vote for Modi should drown themselves in sea".

Nationalist Congress Party
Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) was in alliance with the INC in the states of Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand and Maharashtra.

Rashtriya Janata Dal
Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Lalu Prasad Yadav said of the BJP's ruling chances that "Modi and Advani can never become the prime minister in their lifetime. Secular forces in this country would never allow the saffron outfit to come to power". In relation to the INC's Rahul Gandhi he said that Gandhi wants to bring change to the country; he added in relation to Digvijay Singh that he was a "good man".

Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM) contested polls in alliance with INC and RJD in Jharkhand. JMM and INC contested in four and ten seats each, respectively. JMM leader Shibu Soren will run from Dumka, while the other three party's seats could come from Rajmahal, Giridih and the purpose-built city of Jamshedpur.


=== Left parties ===

Communist Party of India (Marxist) and Communist Party of India
The Communist Party of India (Marxist) declared their campaign slogan as "Reject Congress, Defeat BJP." On 3 April, the party published its fourth list of candidates for a total of 94 candidates.
In West Bengal, CPI (M) contested as part of the Left Front. 32 out of the 42 Left Front candidates in West Bengal came from the CPI (M), while 20 of its candidates were running for the first time. In Kerala, the CPI (M) contested as a constituent of the Left Democratic Front. In the list of the 15 CPI (M) candidates in Kerala released in mid-March, four were incumbent Lok Sabha members and five others were independents. The Kollam seat was allocated to M. A. Baby after the RSP left the LDF and joined the United Democratic Front.
In Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Odisha and Tamil Nadu, the CPI (M) made an electoral pact with the CPI and other left parties. In Andhra Pradesh, however, no agreement could be reached between the CPI (M) and the CPI due to differences on the Telangana issue; CPI (M) opposed bifurcation, while the CPI supported creating Telangana. In Telangana region, CPI contested one seat (in alliance with Indian National Congress), while CPI (M) contested two seats.


=== Other parties ===
Aam Aadmi Party
The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), formed in 2012, contested 432 seats and won 4 seats. The party's manifesto focused on anti-corruption measures. Earlier in 2013, the party had made an impressive electoral debut by winning the second highest number of seats in the Delhi Legislative Assembly elections. After forming a short-lived minority government in Delhi, AAP was seen as a major challenger to the other political parties. However, the party lost deposits on 413 seats, surpassing the record of Doordarshi Party, which had lost deposit on 321 seats in 1991. AAP's leader Arvind Kejriwal unsuccessfully contested against the BJP's prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi from Varanasi. Its spokesperson Prashant Bhushan argued that AAP's national debut performance was better than that of the winning party BJP in its first national elections in 1984.

All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
The All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) opted not to join any alliance and contested all seats in the state of Tamil Nadu and the union territory of Puducherry on its own. Party General Secretary J. Jayalalithaa told a March rally that she would modernise the armed forces by enhancing their capabilities so that they were on par with the superpowers. In saying so, she criticised the UPA's governance, including its economic, diplomatic, and defence policies, adding that the modernisation of the armed forces was hindered by the steady curtailment of its funding. The party won an unprecedented 37 out of the 40 parliamentary constituencies it contested and emerged as the third-largest party in the 16th Lok Sabha of the Indian Parliament. It was a massive victory that no other regional political party had ever achieved in the history of general elections.

All India Forward Bloc

On 21 March, the All India Forward Bloc released its first list of candidates that covered 38 seats in West Bengal, Maharashtra, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Jharkhand, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Odisha, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Delhi. According to the party's Secretary Debabrata Biswas the main objective of the party was "to strengthen and unite the Left, democratic and secular forces to achieve an alternative policy for reconstruction of the country." In West Bengal the party contested the election as part of the Left Front. To defend the two West Bengal seats that it won in 2009, the party decided to field incumbent MP Narahari Mahato in the Purulia seat and a new candidate in the Cooch Behar seat.

Bahujan Samaj Party
On 19 March, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) leader Mayawati declared that the party would contest the election on its own and fielded candidates in all 80 seats in Uttar Pradesh. Mayawati was confident that the BSP would seek a mandate to form a government with support of secular parties. The party secured the third highest vote share in the Country and yet did not win a single seat.

Communist Party of India (Marxist–Leninist) Liberation
At a press conference held on 10 March, General Secretary of the party Dipankar Bhattacharya said his party would field 85 candidates in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Punjab, Jharkhand and Puducherry.

Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) opted not to join an UPA pre-poll alliance and contested all seats in Tamil Nadu with its own regional alliance. Party leader Karunanidhi announced Democratic Progressive Alliance (DPA) with local parties like VCK, MMK, IUML and Puthiya Tamizhagam. DMK was not able to secure even a single seat throughout the country.

Janata Dal (United)
The media speculated that Modi still had a chance of gaining in Bihar at the expense of Nitish Kumar's Janata Dal. Whilst the BJP were in coalition with JD(U), Modi was not allowed to speak at rallies in the party by mutual understanding and was only allowed for special events such as a funeral or party conclave, even Modi's flood relief aid to Bihar was termed communal. Bihar was seen as test case for Modi's popularity if the BJP could increase its tally at the expense of the JD(U). There was also speculation that Lalu Prasad Yadav could make a relative comeback after the 2010 provincial election if he is not convicted over the fodder scam. It also suggested that this would be an eager race as it could determine if Kumar's decision to leave the NDA in June 2013 was prudent and if he has any national political scope left; while for Modi it would give crucial seats to the BJP and be able to attract potential allies as Bihar is largely based on caste politics. In January 2014, Kumar referred to Gandhi's stand against corruption as a "farce" after hearing of a meeting between Gandhi and RJD chief Lalu Prasad Yadav despite Yadav being out on bail, after being convicted in the fodder scam. He termed their alliance as "natural" and stated that them coming together was no surprise.

All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen
Asaduddin Owaisi announced 5 candidates from the All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM) participated in various parliamentary constituencies of Telangana State. 
Asaduddin Owaisi - Hyderabad
Narla Mohan Rao - Secunderabad
Divakar Dharanikota Sudhakar - Malkajgiri
P.V.N. Reddy - Nandyal, Andhra Pradesh (from 2014 onwards)
Guahati Mothilal - Bhongir

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena
The Raj Thackeray-led Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) announced its first list of seven candidates. Six of them contested against candidates of Shiv Sena. The party, however, also supported Modi's prime ministerial candidature. The move read as an implicit acceptance of the BJP's Nitin Gadkari's call not to contest against the NDA and to support its own candidates.

Nav Bharat Democratic Party
Nav Bharat Democratic stepped into the political arena with 9 candidates spread across Uttar Pradesh and Punjab. The party was established by RK Misra.

Samajwadi Party
Samajwadi Party president Mulayam Singh Yadav claimed that the Third Front government will be formed in the center with the help of his party. To counter the "Modi-effect" on other constituencies near Varanasi, Yadav decided to contest from Azamgarh and Mainpuri. The party decided not to field any candidates against the INC's Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi from Rai Bariely and Amethi, respectively, in response to the INC's decision not to field any candidates against Mulayam Singh Yadav and Dimple Yadav from Mainpuri and Kannauj, respectively.

Sikkim Democratic Front
On 10 March, the Sikkim Democratic Front declared that its incumbent MP, Prem Das Rai, would run for re-election. The party also released a list of 32 candidates for the 2014 Sikkim Legislative Assembly election that will be held simultaneously with the election.

All India Trinamool Congress
All India Trinamool Congress leader Mamata Banerjee declared that the party would contest all 42 seats in West Bengal by itself, making this the first occurrence of the party contesting a general election in West Bengal without an alliance with either of the two largest parties, BJP and INC. Banerjee told a rally in Cooch Behar district, near the international border with Bangladesh, that she would take up the issue of the border enclaves upon ascertaining the views of the local people living in the adversely possessed areas. She further noted that she had opposed the central government's agreement in 2011 over the Teesta treaty of water-sharing between the two countries on the grounds of receding waters affecting drinking water availability.

YSR Congress Party
Y. S. Jaganmohan Reddy's YSR Congress Party fielded candidates across Andhra Pradesh (Rayalaseema & Coastal Andhra) and some districts of Telangana. The party fielded several bureaucrats, businessmen and relatives of politicians for Lok Sabha seats in Andhra Pradesh (Rayalaseema & Coastal Andhra), including D. Kishore Rao, the former secretary of the Gujarat Human Rights Commission. In a statement in March, Reddy stated that he would ally himself with whoever would win the election.


== Surveys and polls ==


=== Opinion polls ===

Opinion polls generally showed the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) to be the front runner in the election with the emergence of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) as the single largest party.


=== Exit polls ===
The Election Commission of India banned the publication of all exit polls starting 48 hours before Phase 1 of the election until the end of Phase 9. This was intended to prevent exit polls from earlier phases affecting voter decisions in later phases. The ban ended after the close of Phase 9 voting at 6:30pm IST on 12 May 2014.


== Controversies ==

During the course of the campaign, several controversies arose with parties being accused by one another and the Election Commission of India (ECI) of violating Election Commission of India's Model Code of Conduct that is in force during the election. The ECI was itself criticised for bias practices when it raided the BJP's Varanasi office, where Narendra Modi was the BJP candidate.
In the run-up to the election, the media in India was criticised for its establishment ties between family owners and political parties. It caused self-censorship and editorial dismissals at certain media outlets.
India Today temporarily suspended its CVoter opinion poll in late February after a News Express sting operation suggesting Polling Agencies like Ipsos and CVoter fudged the numbers to show BJP candidate Narendra Modi in the lead.


== Voting ==
In total there were 1.4 million electronic voting machines in 930,000 voting centres. The voter-verified paper audit trail (VVPAT) system which enables EVM to record each vote cast by generating the EVM slip, was introduced in 8 constituencies of Lucknow, Gandhinagar, Bangalore South, Chennai Central, Jadavpur, Raipur, Patna Sahib and Mizoram as a pilot project. Also, Braille ballot sheets for the blind were arranged at polling stations. The scale of the election required 1.1 million of civil servants and 5.5 million civilian employees to handle the election. It was the first election that had the "none of the above" option and allowed Non-Resident Indians to vote; though only in India. Security was increased during the election, particularly as the Communist Party of India (Maoist) (CPI (Maoist)) called for a boycott of the election. On 12 April, even though there was no voting this day, a vehicle in Chhattisgarh hit a CPI (Maoist) landmine resulting in the deaths of two bus drivers and five election officials, with four more injured, while travelling from Kutru to Bijapur in preparation for the fifth phase of voting. On the same day, within an hour, they also ambushed a vehicle resulting in the deaths of five paramilitary soldiers in the Darbha forest. The election was the longest and the most expensive general election in the history of the country, with the Election Commission of India estimating that the election did cost the exchequer ₹ 3500 crore (US$577 million), excluding the expenses incurred for security and by the individual political parties. Parties were expected to spend ₹ 30,500 crore (US$5 billion) in the election, according to the Centre for Media Studies. This was three times the amount spent in the previous election in 2009, and was then the world's second highest after the US$7 billion spent on the 2012 US presidential election.
The election reportedly boosted the hospitality sector as, according to ASSOCHAM, tourist arrivals from the countries such as the US, UK, France, Singapore and the U.A.E. have gone up by 10–15 per cent, while the movement of domestic tourists jumped by 62%.


=== Turnout ===
Based on data from Election Commission India

Phase 1: 7 April
Turnout was 75% in Assam and 84% in Tripura. Assam's INC Chief Minister Tarun Gogoi said that "there is no Narendra Modi magic in Assam. The Congress has been winning every form of elections since 2001 in Assam, and we are going to repeat the performance this time." Additionally, the borders with Bangladesh and Bhutan were closed for security reasons.

Phase 2: 9 and 11 April
The turnouts were recorded at 82.5% in Nagaland, 71% in Arunachal Pradesh, 66% in Meghalaya and 70% in Manipur. Mizoram's voting was deferred to 11 April, where the turnout was 60%.

Phase 3: 10 April
About 110 million of people were eligible to vote for 91 seats. The turnout was 76% in Kerala, 64% in Delhi, 55.98% in Madhya Pradesh, 54.13% in Maharashtra, 65% in Uttar Pradesh and 66.29% in Jammu. Kerala and Chandigarh set new voter turnout records. A higher proportion of eligible electors voted in 2014 than in 2009.

Phase 4: 12 April
Voter turnout set new records or were near record levels with 75% in Goa, 75% in Assam, 81.8% in Tripura and 80.97% in Sikkim (including the 2014 Sikkim Legislative Assembly election). West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee nearly cancelled the polls in her region after initially refusing to changes to the appointments of civil service departments, but was forced to constitutionally do so.

Phase 5: 17 April
The largest voting day involved nearly 200 million eligible voters, 1,769 candidates for 121 seat. The voting turnout in Uttar Pradesh was 62%, West Bengal was 80%, over 70% in Odisha, 69% in Jammu and Kashmir, 54% in Madhya Pradesh and 62% in Jharkhand. Manipur had 74% and Maharashtra had a 61.7% turnout. In Karnataka, the average voting was up on 65% against 58% in the previous election, though urban voters were lower. In Chhattisgarh, the voter turnout was 63.44% compared to 57.6% in 2009, while Rajasthan recorded a 63.25% voter turnout, compared to 48.09% in 2009. In Bihar's seven constituencies, the turnout was 56%, compared to 39% in 2009. In one of six constituencies from Jammu and Kashmir, Udhampur, the turnout of 70% was significantly higher than the 2009 figure of 45%. Overall across India, the turnout on the day was over 65% and nearly all constituencies had a higher voter turnout than 2009.

Phase 6: 24 April
The second largest voting day entailed 180 million eligible voters across 201,735 voting centres to elect 117 members of parliament from 2,098 candidates. Tamil Nadu set a new voter turnout record for Lok Sabha elections with 73%, while West Bengal experienced the highest voter turnout for the day at 82%. As compared to that, urban centres such as Mumbai and Chennai saw lower voter turnouts, but bettered their figures from previous years. Mumbai witnessed a 53% turnout, compared to 41% in 2009. The rural areas of Maharashtra saw over 60% turnout, Madhya Pradesh had 64%, Uttar Pradesh had over 60%, Chhattisgarh had about 66%, Assam had over 70%, Bihar has about 60%, Jharkhand had 63.4%, Rajasthan had about 60% and Pudhucherry had about 82%. One of six constituencies from Jammu and Kashmir, Anantnag, had the lowest turnout of 28%, after a boycott call by separatists, an attack on 22 April that killed three people, and with thousands of Kashmiri Pandits protesting in the afternoon that their names were missing from the electoral roll. As with previous phases, the overall voter turnout for the day was higher than 2009. In both Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the turnout was about 9% higher, while Uttar Pradesh saw a 13% increase.

Phase 7: 30 April
The 7th phase of voting entailed about 140 million eligible voters to elect 89 members of parliament from 1,295 candidates in seven states and two Union Territories. Punjab set a new record in its voter turnout for general elections with 73%. Gujarat saw the highest jump in voter turnout for the day with 62% turnout compared to 48% turnout in 2009 Lok Sabha elections. The nine constituencies in West Bengal reported over 81% turnout. Uttar Pradesh witnessed 57% turnout compared to 48% in 2009, while Bihar saw 60% compared to 52% in 2009. One of six constituencies from Jammu and Kashmir, eligible to vote in this phase, had the lowest turnout for the day at 26% compared to 25.55% in 2009, after a boycott call by separatists. Telangana region of Andhra Pradesh, which will become India's new state on 2 June 2014, saw nearly 72% turnout to elect Lok Sabha members as well as its first state government. The aggregate turnout so far in the first 7 phases for 438 parliamentary seats has been 66.20%, significantly more than 57.41% figure in 2009 general elections.

Phase 8: 7 May
The 8th phase saw voting for 64 Lok Sabha seats in seven states with 897 candidates competing. Along with the general elections, polls were also held for the first Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh excluding Telangana region. The voter turnout was high, with West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh each setting their respective general election voter turnout records. West Bengal recorded 81% polling compared to 78% for 2009. Andhra Pradesh recorded nearly 76% voter turnout. Himachal Pradesh saw about 66% turnout compared to 58% for 2009. Uttarakhand also set a new voter turnout record with 62% compared to 53% in 2009. The 2 constituencies of Jammu & Kashmir that voted witnessed a 49.9% turnout, while constituencies of Bihar saw 58% compared to 45% in 2009. Uttar Pradesh experienced a 55.5% turnout compared to 43.4% in 2009.

Phase 9: 12 May
The 9th and last phase of voting entailed over 90 million eligible voters to elect 41 members of parliament from 606 candidates in 3 states. The 6 seats in Bihar saw a voter turnout of 58%, compared to 46% in 2009. Uttar Pradesh's 18 constituencies witnessed a 55.3% turnout, compared to 46.6% in 2009. In West Bengal, the 17 constituencies that voted, saw a turnout of about 80% compared to 82% in 2009.
The 2014 general elections, according to the Election Commission of India, recorded a cumulative total of 66.38% voter turnout, or 551.3 million out of 814 million eligible people casting their vote, according to provisional figures. The 2014 turnout surpassed India's previous highest voter turnout record of 64% in 1984 general elections. The voter turnout in 2009 general elections was 58.19%, while 2004 general elections saw a voter turnout of 56.98%. The 2014 general elections entailed 8,202 candidates competing for 543 seats.


=== Re-polls ===
Many locations required re-polling for various reasons. There was re-polling on 9 polling stations in Orissa on 25 April. The Election Commission ordered re-polls in 52 polling booths (30 in Andhra Pradesh & Telangana, 11 in Uttar Pradesh and 11 in West Bengal) because of complaints of booth capturing, rigging, violence or as demanded by the locals. The re-poll was held on 13 May. In Uttar Pradesh, re-polls were held in 3 polling booths in Muzaffarnagar, 7 in Ferozabad and 1 in Badaun. Re-polling also occurred on 14 May in Arunachal Pradesh and on 15 May in the states of Nagaland and Haryana. The Left parties and BJP alleged mass rigging and booth capturing by Trinamool Congress at thousands of polling stations in West Bengal. AAP demanded re-polling in 108 booths.
Congress demanded re-polling at 1,344 polling stations in Nagaland. Re-polling was done in two polling stations in Tamil Nadu on 10 May and in 3 polling stations in Andhra Pradesh(Rayalaseema & Coastal Andhra) on 13 May. In Bihar, there was re-polling on 2 polling stations of Sitamarhi on 11 May and 3 polling stations in Muzaffarnagar went to re-polling on 13 May. On 15 May, there was re-polling in one booth in Tamil Nadu, and at 5 booths in West Bengal, Bihar, Nagaland. It was reported that not a single voter turned up for a re-poll at 5 polling stations in Nagaland on 15 May. On 12 May, the Bombay High court declined to order supplementary polling for voters in Maharashtra whose names were missing from the electoral rolls. There were speculated to be as many as 100,000 voters missing from the electoral roll in Pune and as many as 200,000 missing from electoral roll in Mumbai.


=== Voting pattern ===
The BJP secured 39% support from first time voters, while Congress received 19% of the first time votes. The NDA won 39 of 74 seats where Muslim voters make up between 21 and 95% of the total electorate. The BJP won all 16 seats in Uttar Pradesh. It also secured 5 out of 9 such seats in Bihar. Analyst Saeed Naqvi believes that Amit Shah managed to convince Dalits and OBC voters to elect the BJP as "Muslim appeasers in an atmosphere of perpetual communal tension".
The BJP won all 26 seats in Gujarat, marking the first time a single party won all seats in the state. The previous record was held by the Congress which won 25 of the 26 seats in the 1984 general election. The assembly segment-wise result of Lok Sabha elections in Uttar Pradesh shows that the BJP was number one in 328 seats, while the ruling SP led in just 42. Congress was ahead in 15, BSP 9 and Apna Dal 9. In 2012, SP had formed government by winning 224 assembly seats. BSP had won 80, BJP 47, Congress 28 and Apna Dal one.
Similarly, in Maharashtra BJP-Shiva Sena alliance has got a lead in 246 assembly segments out of the total 288. By securing seven of the 10 Lok Sabha seats in Haryana, BJP remained ahead on 52 assembly segments in the state. Its ally HJC could not win any of the Lok Sabha seats it contested, but its candidates remained ahead in seven assembly segments. BJP contested 8 Lok Sabha seats in Haryana, leaving two constituencies for its alliance partner HJC. BJP candidates remained ahead in all 27 assembly segments of Ambala, Karnal and Faridabad parliamentary constituencies. BJP won all seats except Rohtak where its candidate Om Prakash Dhankar lost to Haryana chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda's son and sitting MP Deepender Hooda.


== Results ==

About one-third of all winners had at least one pending criminal case against them, with some having serious criminal cases. A candidate with criminal case(s) had 13% chance of winning the election, whereas a candidate with a clean record had only 5% chance of winning. (Here, chance of winning = ⁠No. of winners in the category/ Total no. of candidates in that category⁠.)
Out of the 542 members analysed, 443 (82%) had total assets of ₹1 crore (US$100,000) or more. In the 15th Lok Sabha, out of 521 members analysed, 300 (58%) members had assets of ₹1 crore (US$100,000) or more. The average assets per member are ₹14.7 crore (US$1.5 million) (in 2009, this figure was ₹5.35 crore (US$560,000)).


=== Proportionality ===
The proportionality of parliamentary seats won in the 2014 election, as measured by the Gallagher index, yielded an index score of 17.53, indicating a disproportionate outcome that strongly favoured the BJP while being significantly disadvantageous for most other parties and independents.


=== Results by Region ===


==== Summary ====


=== By alliance ===
National Democratic Alliance (336)

United Progressive Alliance (60)
Others (147)


=== By state ===
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands (1) 

Andhra Pradesh (25)

 Arunachal Pradesh (2) 

 Assam (14) 

 Bihar (40) 

 Chandigarh (1) 

 Chhattisgarh (11) 

 Dadra & Nagar Haveli (1) 

 Daman & Diu (1) 

 NCT of Delhi (7) 

 Goa (2) 

Gujarat (26)

Haryana (10)

Himachal Pradesh (4)

Jammu and Kashmir (6)

Jharkhand (14)

Karnataka (28)

Kerala (20)

19 July 2018 Jose K Mani quit the lower house after being nominated to Rajya Sabha.[1]
 Lakshadweep (1) 

Madhya Pradesh (29)

Maharashtra (48)

 Manipur (2) 

 Meghalaya (2) 

 Mizoram (1) 

 Nagaland (1) 

 Odisha (21) 

 Puducherry (1) 

Punjab (13)

Rajasthan (25)

Sikkim (1)

Tamil Nadu (39)

 Telangana (17) 

Tripura (2)

Uttar Pradesh (80)

 Uttarakhand (5) 

West Bengal (42)


== Reactions ==


=== Domestic ===
Economic
The country's economic indicators were performing well in advance of the result in expectation of a BJP win, on the perception that Modi is business-friendly. The benchmark BSE Sensex and CNX Nifty indices hit record highs and the Indian rupee strengthened following months of poor performance. On the result day, as early vote counts gave the BJP a majority lead, the Sensex reached a record high of 25,375.63 points. It ended the day at a new closing high of 24,121.74. The Nifty reached a record high of 7,563.50, before ending the day at a new closing high of 7,203. The Indian rupee rose to an 11-month high of 58.62 against the US dollar and closed at 58.79. Deutsche Bank revised its December 2014 target for the Sensex to 28,000, and Macquarie revised its 12-month target for the Nifty to 8,400 from 7,200. Edelweiss set its December 2014 targets for the Sensex and Nifty at 29,000 and 9,000 respectively.

Media
India Times suggested that the election was watched in Pakistan with Modi being the less popular candidate than AAP's Kejriwal. Comparisons were made between the latter and the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf's Imran Khan. Analysts suggested a high turnout would favour the BJP as it indicates an increase in participation of urban voters who are the party's traditional vote bank. Others have suggested however, that this could indicate an increase in voting amongst the 150 million Muslims that generally support the INC. Varghese K George, the political editor of The Hindu said that both readings rely on too many assumptions but that the only reading so far was the BJP was "doing well [and] Modi is managing to make some connection with voters and the Congress is doing pretty badly."

Politicians
When it became clear that the BJP would win the election, Narendra Modi tweeted, "India has won! Bharat ki Vijay. Ache din ane wale hai (good days are ahead)." This tweet instantly became India's most retweeted Twitter post. Manmohan Singh congratulated Modi by telephone. Congress President Sonia Gandhi accepted the defeat and congratulated the new government saying, "I congratulate the next government. I take full responsibility for the loss of Congress." Rahul Gandhi also did the same saying, "The new government has been given a mandate by the people. As Congress Vice President I hold myself responsible. The Congress party has done badly."
Although the Congress had been voted out of power in past too, but this was the first time since the 1977 general elections that the Congress did not happen to be the single largest party in terms of percentage of votes obtained. At a voteshare of around 19%, it was the lowest ever share of votes polled by the Congress party nationally since the country's first general elections, surpassing the record of 25.82% voteshare polled in 1998 general elections. It was also for the first time in the history of the nation that INC had less than 100 MPs in the Lok Sabha, surpassing the record of 114 seats in 1999 general elections. Since the Congress had won less than 54 seats, it would be also for the first time in the history of the nation that a non-Congress government does not has an official LoP from the INC. Hence these results are considered to be the worst ever performance of the Indian National Congress in its history. 
Former Union Minister of Rural Development Jairam Ramesh said, "I am surprised by the results, especially in Telangana and Jharkhand. There was clearly a Modi effect." At the Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting on 19 May, general secretary Mohan Prakash claimed that Israeli intelligence agency Mossad and the RSS had been working together since 2009 to defeat the UPA government. Prakash further claimed that this was because of Israel's unhappiness with the UPA government. According to him, this was because the UPA only had limited political relations with Israel, unlike the previous NDA government. Outgoing Finance Minister P. Chidambaram criticised the style of functioning and work culture at the Congress headquarters for the loss, and suggested adopting a more corporate approach. Some Congress members blamed Japanese communication agency Dentsu, which had been hired by the party, at a cost of nearly ₹ 6 billion, to handle their election advertising campaign and image makeover of Rahul Gandhi along with another agency Burson-Marsteller. Chairman of the party's communication department Ajay Maken harshly criticised Dentsu India executive chairman Rohit Ohri for a "spineless campaign". Priya Dutt, Secretary of the party's communication department, pointed out the gap between the people and the Congress leadership stating, "We need to bridge that gap. We need to bring that right up to the leadership. There is a lot of criticism. We have to look at where we have gone wrong in the past 10 years." DNA described the accusations against Mossad, RSS and Dentsu as "bizarre theories", and noted that "everyone except vice-president Rahul Gandhi has been held responsible for their crushing defeat."
Union minister in the outgoing government Milind Deora told The Indian Express on 21 May that although "many factors" led to the party's defeat and Rahul's leadership alone could not be blamed, "it was not about one person's image but the people surrounding that person also. Deora stated that many party members felt that the decision makers in the party had "no electoral experience...no stature, standing, respect and credibility in the party". He accused the people who "were in charge of important departments and held key positions" of not listening to party cadres and MPs, which he believed prevented a "diverse opinion" from being heard and "shut out a lot of people". Deora stated, "A lot of us felt our voices were never heard. We felt our voices don't matter. This has to change. The MPs and ministers should not feel we are being not heard. It is not the advisors alone. The people who take the advice also have to bear responsibility. Those who gave advice and those who received the advice as also those who feel they can give better advice – all have to bear responsibility." Deora felt the party had to "open up" and "promote avenues for dissent and debate internally". When asked who was to blame, Deora said, "there are many people from top to bottom ... there was lack of coordination and the response was slow ... there was a very unresponsive attitude. ... the buck stops with the party." Although this statement received support from several Congress members, Deora clarified on Twitter, "My comments are out of emotions of deep loyalty to the party, pain of our performance & a sincere desire to see us bounce back. Nothing more." Senior party leader Satyavrat Chaturvedi expressed hope that an "honest and ruthless introspection" would be carried out fix the problems. He further stated that while Deora's statement may not have been fully correct, a "large portion of what he said is correct". Congress members such as Jairam Ramesh, Madan Gopal and Kanishka Singh criticised Rahul Gandhi's aides.

Individuals
Rajnikanth congratulated Narendra Modi on Twitter for his "historic win". The actor also congratulated Jayalalithaa for her party's performance in the election. Tamil actor Dhanush also tweeted congratulations to Modi. Several Bollywood celebrities including Subhash Ghai, Vishal Dadalani, Lata Mangeshkar, Ranvir Shorey, Vivek Oberoi, Baba Sehgal, Shekhar Kapur, Arshad Warsi, Preity Zinta, Arjun Rampal, Farhan Akhtar, Karan Johar, Sangeeth Sivan, Kabir Bedi, Anupam Kher, Madhur Bhandarkar, Atul Kasbekar and Pritish Nandy tweeted congratulations to Modi and the BJP for their victory.
President of Film Federation of India Ravi Kottarakara congratulated Modi "on behalf of the entire Indian film fraternity".  CEO of the Film & TV Producers Guild of India Kulmmet Makkar described the "clear mandate" as being "great" for the Indian film industry. He also expressed "positive hopes" from the new government.


=== International ===
 Afghanistan – President Hamid Karzai sent congratulations. Karzai, who attended school in Shimla, spoke to Modi in Hindi. Spokesperson Aimal Faizi tweeted, "President #Karzai extends his warm Congratulations to @narendramodi on victory in elections. Afghans always regard #India as a true friend"
 Australia – Prime Minister Tony Abbott called Modi to congratulate him. He tweeted, "I've spoken to @narendramodi and congratulated him on his success. I look forward to strengthening ties between India and Australia". He further said that he was looking forward to meet Modi during the upcoming G-20 Summit to be held in Brisbane in November 2014.
 Bangladesh – Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina wrote, "The decisive verdict given by the people of your great country is a strong testimony to your dynamic, inspiring and visionary leadership qualities and manifestation of the trust and confidence reposed in you by the people of the largest democracy in the world. I am delighted to see a great friend of Bangladesh leading an extremely friendly country, India, in the coming days." She further stated, "I hope that you would find my country your second home and first destination for your official visit abroad". Hasina also sent a separate letter to BJP President Rajnath Singh congratulating him and party members for their "landslide victory", on behalf of the Bangladesh Awami League. Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) chief Khaleda Zia, and the Jamaat-e-Islami also sent messages congratulating Modi.
 Bhutan – Prime Minister Tshering Tobgay and King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck called Modi and congratulated him on his victory.
 Brunei – Brunei Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah sent a message of congratulations to Modi. In his message, the Sultan wished Modi success and looked forward to working with him to strengthen long-standing ties of friendship and co-operation between Brunei and India, including through work in the Commonwealth and the Asean-India Dialogue.
 Canada – Canadian High Commissioner Stewart Beck said, "I had the pleasure to meet with Modi during his time as the Chief Minister of Gujarat and I look forward to working with him to grow Canada's bilateral relationship with India. I also wish to congratulate the people of India on exercising their right to vote and showing the world the strength of their democratic system." Prime minister Stephen Harper sent a congratulatory message to Modi on 17 May.
 China – Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying said, "China is willing to make joint efforts with the new Indian government, maintain high level exchanges, deepen cooperation in all areas and bring the China-India strategic partnership to new height." The Chinese government formally congratulated Modi on 23 May. The Chinese government had been waiting for Modi to be officially be sworn in before issuing a formal message, as they were conscious of protocol. Modi made four visits to China during his tenure as Chief Minister of Gujarat, resulting in over US$900 million worth of Chinese investments in Gujarat. Premier Li Keqiang congratulated Modi on 26 May. He stated that China viewed India as a "natural cooperative partner" and expressed his desire to work together for "peaceful, cooperative and common development" that would "not only bring benefits to their own people but also contribute to peace, stability and prosperity of Asia and beyond".
 Denmark – Prime Minister Helle Thorning-Schmidt called Modi and congratulated him on his victory.
 France – French Ambassador to India François Richier stated, "This massive vote of confidence highlights the vitality of Indian democracy. France is keen to work hand in hand with the new Indian leadership. Paris statement will follow formal announcement by Election Commission." President Francois Hollande congratulated Modi by telephone on 19 May. He invited him to come to France "when he wished". French Embassy officials stated, "He [Hollande] confirmed that he [Modi] would have France's support in the task at hand and reiterated his commitment to the strategic partnership and friendship between France and India, a partner and ally of France."
 Germany – On 15 May, the day prior to the results being declared, German Ambassador to India Michael Steiner stated, "An elected Prime Minister of India does not need a visa for Germany, he is welcome there". Chancellor Angela Merkel called Modi on 19 May, congratulated him on his victory and invited him to Berlin.
 Israel – Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu telephoned Narendra Modi to congratulate him. A statement read, "He [Netanyahu] said that he was looking forward to work with Mr. Modi and enhance bilateral cooperation".
 Japan – Prime Minister Shinzo Abe called Modi and congratulated him on his victory.
 Malaysia – Prime Minister Najib Razak congratulated Modi and the BJP on Twitter, and also stated that he was "looking forward to continuing strong Malaysia-India partnership" under the new government.
 Maldives – President Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom congratulated Modi and sent wishes for "every success and prosperity". The President stated that India had chosen "the most proficient leadership". Modi was also congratulated by former President Mohamed Nasheed on Twitter. Indian High Commissioner to the Maldives Rajeev Shahare stated that relations between the countries would strengthen under the new prime minister.
 Mauritius – Prime Minister Navinchandra Ramgoolam sent a message to Modi on 16 May, congratulating Modi for "the impressive and well-deserved victory of his party". Ramgoolam stated that "these elections in the largest democracy of the world are yet again a testimony to the exceptional robustness of Indian democracy", and added that "Mauritius applauds and commends India for upholding her acclaimed democratic credentials to which Mauritius feels particularly attached". He further stated "your electoral victory is a defining moment in the contemporary history of your great country.  It certainly reflects the trust that the people place in you to chart the future course of your nation. You embody the politics of hope and delivery to your people in their aspirations for development and prosperity".
   Nepal – Prime Minister Sushil Koirala congratulated Narendra Modi on his victory and invited him to visit Nepal. President Ram Baran Yadav also called Modi and BJP President Rajnath Singh to congratulate them on the BJP's victory.
 New Zealand –  Prime Minister John Key congratulated Modi by letter. Key expressed hope that the two countries would be able to negotiate a free trade agreement, which they began discussing in 2010. However, talks later stalled and the last round of discussions was held in July 2013. The Prime Minister stated, "We are sort of hopeful we can reignite the free trade agreement with Modi as the new Prime Minister. He has obviously been very pro-business and he has had an overwhelming mandate delivered to him so you can see the Indian people want and expect to see high levels of economic growth. One of those things is trade, so we are certainly going to be taking it up with the new Indian Government at the appropriate time."
 Norway – Prime Minister Erna Solberg called Modi and congratulated him on his victory.
 Pakistan – Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif congratulated Modi and offered good wishes on the BJP's "impressive victory". Sharif also invited Modi to visit Pakistan.
 Qatar – Prime Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa al-Thani congratulated Modi on his party's victory in the general election in a telephone conversation.
 Russia – President Vladimir Putin congratulated Modi and the BJP on the election victory gave a high assessment of the traditionally friendly ties between Russia and India. These ties have a foundation in the Declaration on Strategic Partnership, which was signed while the BJP was in power and set a development course for bilateral relations for years to come.
 Singapore – Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong congratulated Modi and the BJP on Twitter and Facebook, and also stated that he was "looking forward to working with the new Indian Government to strengthen India-Singapore relations". Modi replied to the tweet stating, "@leehsienloong Thank you very much. Singapore is a valued friend & I am sure we will make our ties stronger in the times to come". Former Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong wrote, "I recall our meetings and frank exchange of views since 2006 when I visited Gujarat. You have always shown a strong resolve to bring economic prosperity to the Indian people.... I am confident that you will lead India to greater heights as Prime Minister, and further build on the excellent ties between our two countries."
 South Africa – President Jacob Zuma said in a statement on 17 May, "With India under the leadership of Mr Modi, the Government of South Africa looks forward to consolidating the strong bilateral political and economic relations that exist between our two sister Republics."
 Spain – President Mariano Rajoy sent a letter congratulating Modi on his "brilliant victory" in the election. Rajoy expressed his admiration for the "democratic spirit that reigned over such a complex election process". The President concluded his letter stating that he was looking forward to meeting Modi in person and offered his "warmest regards and deepest personal respect".
 Sri Lanka – President Mahinda Rajapaksa called Modi and congratulated him for a "great" victory. The President tweeted, "Called @narendramodi a short while ago; Congratulated on BJP victory & invited for a state visit to #SriLanka"
 Tibet – Tibetan Prime Minister-in-exile Lobsang Sangay thanked the UPA government "or their unwavering support for the Tibetan people during its two full terms", and also congratulated the BJP-led NDA for their victory.
 United Kingdom – Prime Minister David Cameron called Modi and congratulated him on the "election success" and stated that he was keen on working together, one of the first Western leaders to do. A spokesperson stated, "The prime minister called Narendra Modi this morning to congratulate him on his victory in the Indian elections and the record turnout, making this the biggest democratic election in history. Modi said he would be delighted to accept the Prime Minister's invitation to visit the UK. Both leaders agreed on the importance of the UK-India relationship and agreed to work together to strengthen it in the months ahead." Cameron also tweeted using his official account, "Congratulations @narendramodi on victory in India's elections. Keen to work together to get the most from UK-India relationship". British Foreign Minister William Hague stated, "I congratulate Narendra Modi and the BJP on their success and look forward to forging an even closer partnership with India in the months ahead. UK has strong ties with India and the British government looks forward to working with the new Indian government to build on this relationship and deliver security, growth and prosperity for both our nations."
 United States – White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said, "We congratulate Narendra Modi and the BJP on winning a majority of seats in this historic election. Once the government is formed, we look forward to working closely with the prime minister and the Cabinet to advance our strong bilateral relationship based on shared democratic values. The prime minister of India will be welcomed to the US." The White House National Security Council tweeted, "US congratulates BJP on its victory in India's historic election. We look forward to working with government once formed to advance our partnership". Secretary of State John Kerry tweeted, "Congrats to @narendramodi and BJP. Look forward to working w/you/growing shared prosperity/security w/world's largest democracy".
Narendra Modi responded to each tweet from world leaders thanking them for their support. The media reported the order in which Modi responded to the tweets, and noted that Barack Obama was the last to receive a reply from him. The New York Times observed that "the order in which he thanked them and one notable omission, later rectified, was more interesting than the content of the tweets themselves." The paper further stated, "The silence underscored what will be uncomfortable diplomatic theater in the weeks and months to come. The United States refused to issue Mr. Modi a visa in 2005 as a response to his alleged role in the 2002 Gujarat riots. As Mr. Modi's star rose in the past year, American leaders reached out, but a thaw on Mr. Modi's side has been almost imperceptible." State Department Spokesperson Jen Psaki said, "I think our relationship between the United States and India is so strong and enduring we won't worry about the Twitter rank order". John Kerry reiterated the United States' willingness to work with the new government as well as the importance of India-US relations on 20 May. He also added that he was looking forward to returning to India soon and "echo President Obama's invitation to Prime Minister Modi to visit the United States at the earliest opportunity." The Times of India noted that the first leader to receive a tweet from Modi was David Cameron. The United Kingdom was among the first countries to end a US-led diplomatic boycott of Modi. Mint stated that Modi's "more expansive responses" were to the leaders of Japan and Russia. According to former foreign secretary Lalit Mansingh, "It is natural that Modi feels affinity with some leaders who are strong leaders, proudly nationalistic, trying to fix the economy with firm measures."

International media
Prior to the announcement of the result, The Washington Post highlighted "...2014 will be the biggest year in the history of democracy, with more people than ever before going to the polls to decide their own fate...this really looks to be one of the most fascinating political events this year, and not just because of its scale...It's a fascinating moment in democracy, and one that shouldn't be ignored". The New York Times added that "the sheer size of the electorate makes this election the largest ever in the world and an inspiring celebration of universal adult suffrage," but also wrote "lurking behind the feel-good spectacle is the reality that India's elections are awash in illegal cash, serious violence and dirty tricks." Bloomberg Businessweek wrote of the election that the "process is awesome in its complexity, and the campaigns have given rise to robust debate...But here's something else not to miss: It's all pretty damn colorful." It highlighted five reasons that make the election interesting: Kejriwal's effect, Modi's wife; exit polls are barred but betting on the future prime minister was not and Modi was in the lead; "vote buying" through cash, alcohol or other means; and 3D campaigning. It also predicted better relations with Japan at the expense of relations with China under Modi, and asked whether a redefinition of India's nuclear weapons program would result from the elections.
An editorial in the China Daily, the Chinese government's official English-language newspaper, compared Modi's "preoccupation with development" with China's "own experiences and development philosophy", and argued that this had "inspired unprecedented optimism here over our South Asian neighbour's growth potential". The paper also argued that "western rhetoric" which stated that both countries were "destined to stand against each other" had been proven wrong by the fact that India and China had "by and large, managed their differences well over the decades". It also welcomed Modi's invitation to Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to attend his swearing-in ceremony.

Individuals and organisations
The 14th Dalai Lama sent a letter congratulating Modi for the BJP's "decisive victory". The Dalai Lama expressed hope that just as Modi had brought development and prosperity to Gujarat, India would continue to "flourish and prosper" under his leadership.
The American Jewish Committee (AJC) congratulated Narendra Modi, and expressed hope that his leadership would further strengthen India's relations with the US and Israel. Director of AJC's Asia Pacific Institute (API) Shira Loewenberg stated, "We look forward to working with Modi and the new government to further strengthen and deepen India's extensive relations with the United States and Israel. BJP has long been a friend to Israel and the Jewish people."


== Government formation ==

Manmohan Singh tendered his resignation to President Pranab Mukherjee on 17 May. He continued as caretaker Prime Minister, at the request of the President, until 26 May 2014, when Narendra Modi and his cabinet were sworn to office.


=== Support for the new government ===

Though the above parties supported BJP, BJP had already won 282 seats (more than the majority number required) hence BJP did not need their support, also the new Prime Minister didn't include most of them in Council of Ministers. This situation was different from Atal Bihari Vajpayee, he had to include many parties of NDA in his cabinet, due to lack of seats.


== See also ==
List of members of the 16th Lok Sabha


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Sardesai, Rajdeep. 2014: The Election that Changed India excerpt
Sridharan, Eswaran. "Behind Modi's Victory." Journal of Democracy (2014) 24#4 pp: 20–33. Online
Gabriel, Karen and P K Vijayan "Made in India to Make in India: The Meanings of Moditva", Exemplar: The Journal of South Asian Studies, Vol. 2, no 3, Spring 2015.


== External links ==
Election Commission of India website
List of Members Elected General Election of the 16th Lok Sabha, 2014

The 2016 BRICS U-17 Football Cup was the first edition of the BRICS U-17 Football Cup. It took place in the Indian state of Goa during the 8th BRICS summit which was also held in India. It began on 5 October and concluded with the final on 15 October. Brazil won the cup defeating South Africa in the final. The tournament featured the under-17 teams of all five members of BRICS with the final taking place at the Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium.


== Teams ==


== Venues ==


== Format ==
All five teams in the tournament shall play each other in a round-robin before the top two teams qualify for the final and the third and fourth place teams play in the third-place match.


== Group stage ==


=== Table ===


=== Fixtures & results ===


== Final and Third place match ==


=== Third-place match ===


=== Final ===


== Winner ==


== Goalscorers ==
4 goals

3 goals

2 goals

1 goal


== References ==

The 2017 SCO summit  was the 17th annual summit of heads of state of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation held between 7 - 10 June in Astana, Kazakhstan. The upgrading of the membership of India and Pakistan to full members was one of the major topics, beside from security related topics, the Belt and Road Initiative and economic cooperation.


== Background ==
On 21 April 2017 the foreign ministers met in Astana to prepare the meeting. The summit was planned to be before the opening of the Expo 2017, which also takes place in Astana.


== India and Pakistan acceptance ==

The acceptance of India and Pakistan to the Shanghai Cooperation Organization was the first since 2001. This makes the SCO the largest and most populous international regional cooperation organization.


== Belt and Road initiative ==
The summit in Astana was the first state visit of General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping after the Belt and Road Forum in Beijing. The linking of SCO to the initiative was a major concern of the Chinese government. With Pakistan on a strategic position of the New Silk Road, the summit was thought to have a positive effect on further developments.
Also the Belt and Road Initiative was also first proposed by Xi Jinping in Kazakhstan in 2013.


== Security issues and anti-terrorism ==
One of the major tasks of the SCO is the combat against terrorism, which is believed to be strengthened through the acceptance of the new members.


== See also ==
Belt and Road Initiative
Expo 2017


== References ==

The 2018 BRICS U-17 Football Cup was the second edition of the BRICS U-17 Football Cup. It took place under the 2018 BRICS Games in Johannesburg, South Africa during the 10th BRICS summit which was held in South Africa.  It had begun on 18 July and concluded with the final on 22 July. The tournament featured the women's under-17 teams of all five members of BRICS making it first women's under 17 tournament between BRICS nation. Brazil topped the group and win the tournament on basis of match points as it was organised as league tournament. This was Brazil second BRICS cup title as they had also won men's edition in 2016.


== Teams ==


== Venues ==
The tournament held at Wits Rugby Stadium in Johannesburg, South Africa.


== Format ==
All five teams in the tournament played each other in a round-robin once.


== Group stage ==


=== Table ===


=== Matches ===


== References ==

The 2018 SCO summit was the 18th annual summit of heads of state of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation held between 9 and 10 June 2018 in Qingdao, China. It was the fourth SCO annual summit held in China, following the Shanghai Summits in 2001 and 2006 and the Beijing Summit in 2012. Leaders of SCO member states China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, India and Pakistan, and observer states Afghanistan, Belarus, Iran and Mongolia, as well as heads of international organizations and institutions such as the United Nations were invited to attend the summit.


== Member states leaders and other dignitaries in attendance ==


=== Member states ===
 China – President of China and CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping
 India – Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi
 Kazakhstan – President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev
 Kyrgyzstan – President of the Kyrgyz Republic Sooronbay Jeenbekov
 Pakistan – President of Pakistan Mamnoon Hussain
 Russia – President of Russia Vladimir Putin
 Tajikistan – President of Tajikistan Emomali Rahmon
 Uzbekistan – President of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev


=== Observer states ===
 Afghanistan – President of Afghanistan Ashraf Ghani
 Belarus – President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko
 Mongolia – President of Mongolia Khaltmaagiin Battulga
 Iran – President of Iran Hassan Rouhani


=== International organizations ===

Heads of international and regional organizations such as the SCO Secretariat, the SCO Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure, ASEAN, the United Nations, the CIS, the CICA, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Union, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank also attended the summit.


== Meeting ==


=== Small-scale talks ===
At about 9 am on June 10, 2018, leaders of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization member states arrived at the Qingdao International Conference Center one after another. Xi Jinping shook hands with them one by one and then took a group photo.
Xi Jinping said that the SCO has always upheld the "Shanghai Spirit" in the face of a complex international situation. The SCO needs to actively respond to challenges, comprehensively promote cooperation in all fields, promote the steady and long-term development of the SCO, and continue to promote all-round cooperation in economy, trade, finance, agriculture, connectivity, and humanities, adhere to combating the "three forces", and maintain the development of the SCO. Xi Jinping also put forward four suggestions.
The meeting also decided that the 2019 Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit would be held in Kyrgyzstan.


=== Heads of State Council Meeting ===
At about 11:00 a.m. on June 10, 2018, the 18th meeting of the Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization was held at the Qingdao International Conference Center. Leaders of SCO member states, heads of permanent institutions, leaders of observer states, and heads of international organizations such as the United Nations attended the meeting.
The parties exchanged views on the current status, tasks and prospects of the SCO's development, coordinated positions and reached consensus on major international and regional issues, and expressed their willingness to continue to follow the " Shanghai Spirit ", continuously consolidate practical cooperation in the political, security, economic, cultural and other fields, improve the global economic governance system, consolidate and develop the multilateral trading system, resolve regional hot issues within the framework of international law, and promote the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
After the meeting, a press release was issued and the leaders of the member states signed the Qingdao Declaration.


=== Welcome Dinner ===
On the evening of June 9, Xi Jinping held a welcome dinner in the banquet hall of Qingdao International Conference Center (Olympic Sailing Theater). The dishes served at the dinner were mainly Confucius Mansion cuisine from Shandong cuisine, with a selection of four dishes and one soup, including Confucius Mansion Yipin Bazhen Soup, Confucius Mansion Fried Fish, Confucius Mansion Fairy Duck, Confucius Mansion Braised Beef Ribs and Confucius Mansion Vegetables. The tableware used in the dinner was designed with the main elements of the Qilu "Haidai Culture" with the themes of Mount Tai, auspicious clouds and the sea, reflecting the tolerance, openness and profoundness of Qilu culture represented by Haidai culture. Some media said that in order to respect the dietary habits of the leaders of the participating countries, all dishes were halal cuisine. However, alcoholic beverages were also provided, and Xi Jinping delivered a toast.


=== Light and fireworks performance "Friends from Afar" ===
The art performance accompanying the summit was titled "Friends from Afar", which was inspired by the first chapter of the Analects of Confucius : "It is a great pleasure to have friends from afar." The performance was directed by Zhang Yimou, lasted about 30 minutes, and was divided into seven chapters. The organizers hoped that the short performance would "display world standards, present Chinese style, and highlight Qingdao's characteristics."
Program

Prologue: "The Light of SCO", exploring the scenery of the Silk Road and meeting friends in Qingdao.
Chapter 1: "Bright Moon over the Horizon", showing the wonders of mountains and seas, and enjoying the bright moon.
Chapter 2: "Qi Feng Lu Yun", searching for the origins of Qi and Lu, and visiting the hometown of Confucius and Mencius.
Chapter Three: "Peace and Prosperity" realizes the dream of rejuvenation and celebrates the prosperity of China.
Chapter 4: "Building a Dream for the Future", creating an ideal future and promoting world harmony.
Chapter Five: "Community of Shared Future", plays the chapter of the four seasons and blooms in all colors.
Taking a bow


== Security ==


=== Traffic hub control ===

From May 26, 2018, until the end of the summit, all major railway stations in China implemented "secondary security checks" for all passengers taking trains to Qingdao. Qingdao Railway Station, Qingdao North Railway Station, Qingdao Liuting International Airport, and Qingdao Bus Terminal deployed a large number of police forces and stepped up security checks to ensure the safety of the summit.


=== Closed-off management ===
The "Notice on Taking Temporary Administrative Measures in Some Areas of the City" issued by the Qingdao Municipal People's Government on June 4, 2018, shows that from 0:00 on June 6, 2018, to 24:00 on June 10, 2018, the areas near May Fourth Square and Qingdao Olympic Sailing Center would be subject to restricted access management, and closed management would be implemented when necessary, and public security checkpoints would be set up on the main roads. Residents and unit staff in the restricted access management area must have entered after a security check with valid identity documents, and other unrelated personnel were prohibited from entering. Except for motor vehicles holding passes that enter and pass after a security check, other vehicles (including non-motor vehicles and motor vehicles) were prohibited from entering and passing. It was also prohibited to sell, transport, carry, and store items with safety hazards in this area, and other activities that affect safety were not allowed. Other media reported that residents living near the venue were asked to leave their homes before June 8 and could only return after 10 pm on June 10. The authorities provided compensation of no more than 800 RMB to those who left their homes, while those who did not want to leave were asked to close the windows of their homes, draw the curtains and seal them to avoid being misjudged by snipers arranged by the authorities.


=== Motor vehicle restrictions ===

On May 29, 2018, the Qingdao Municipal People's Government issued the "Notice on Taking Temporary Traffic Management Measures", which stated that from 20:00 on June 8 to 24:00 on June 10, restrictions would be imposed on motor vehicles on roads in Qingdao. Among them, in Shinan District, Shibei District, Licang District, Laoshan District, Chengyang District, the entire Jiaozhou Bay Tunnel, the entire Jiaozhou Bay Bridge, and some sections of Qinglan, Qingyin, Qingxin, and Longqing Expressways, small passenger cars with local license plates (such as Lu B and Lu U) would be subject to odd-even number restrictions. Small passenger cars with out-of-town license plates were not allowed to pass through the above-mentioned areas from 0:00 on June 8 to 24:00 on June 10. Trucks, special operation vehicles, motorcycles with local license plates, and other motor vehicles with out-of-town license plates are prohibited from passing through the above-mentioned areas from 0:00 on June 6, 2018, to 24:00 on June 11, 2018. Vehicles transporting highly toxic and hazardous chemicals were prohibited from traveling within the administrative area of Qingdao from 00:00 on May 30, 2018, to 24:00 on June 11, 2018.


=== Small aircraft and airborne objects control ===

On May 25, 2018, the Qingdao Municipal People's Government issued the "Decision on Taking Temporary Administrative Measures on Civil Small Aircraft and Airborne Objects", which announced that from May 25 to June 11, temporary management measures would be taken on small aircraft and airborne objects in Qingdao. The public security organs would contact the civil aviation, meteorological, sports, agriculture, forestry, ocean and fishery, land and resources, industry and commerce, radio, television, news and publishing departments to register small aircraft and airborne objects; they may require the relevant aircraft or airborne object holders or units to temporarily seal up the small aircraft or airborne objects they manage and use, and the public security department may directly take temporary sealing measures when necessary. In addition, from June 5 to June 11, all unauthorized small aircraft and airborne objects were prohibited from flying and launching in the administrative area of Qingdao.


== Notes ==


== References ==

General elections were held in India in seven phases from 11 April to 19 May 2019 to elect the members of the 17th Lok Sabha. Votes were counted and the result was declared on 23 May.  Around 912 million people were eligible to vote, and voter turnout was over 67 percent – the highest ever in any Indian general election, as well as the highest ever participation by women voters until the 2024 Indian general election.
The Bharatiya Janata Party won in a landslide receiving 37% of the vote, the highest vote share by a political party since the 1989 general election, and winning 303 seats, further increasing its substantial majority. In addition, the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) won 353 seats. The BJP outperformed most exit polls which had predicted a much narrower mandate for the ruling alliance. The BJP won 37.76% of votes, while the NDA's combined vote was 45% of the 603.7 million votes that were polled. The Indian National Congress won 52 seats, failing to get 10% of the seats needed to claim the post of Leader of the Opposition. In addition, the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) won 91 seats, while other parties won 98 seats.
Legislative assembly elections in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha and Sikkim were held simultaneously with the general election, as well as by-elections of twenty-two seats of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly.


== Electoral system ==
All 543 elected MPs are elected from single-member constituencies using first-past-the-post voting. The President of India appoints an additional two members from the Anglo-Indian community if he believes that community is under-represented.
Eligible voters must be Indian citizens, 18 or older, an ordinary resident of the polling area of the constituency and registered to vote (name included in the electoral rolls), possess a valid voter identification card issued by the Election Commission of India or an equivalent. Some people convicted of electoral or other offences are barred from voting.
The elections are held on schedule and as per the Constitution of India that mandates parliamentary elections once every five years.


== Election schedule ==

The election schedule was announced by Election Commission of India (ECI) on 10 March 2019, and with it the Model Code of Conduct came into effect.
The election was scheduled to be held in seven phases. In Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, the election was held in all seven phases. The polling for the Anantnag constituency in the state of Jammu and Kashmir was held in three phases, due to violence in the region.


=== Rescheduled voting, cancellations ===
Vellore, Tamil Nadu: Over ₹11 crore (US$1.2 million) in cash was seized in Vellore from DMK leaders – a regional party in Tamil Nadu. According to The News Minute, this cash is alleged to have been for bribing the voters. Based on the evidence collected during the raids, the Election Commission of India cancelled the 18 April election date in the Vellore constituency. The DMK leaders denied wrongdoing and alleged a conspiracy.
Tripura East, Tripura: The Election Commission of India deferred polling from 18 to 23 April due to the law and order situation. The poll panel took the decision following reports from the Special Police Observers that the circumstances were not conducive for holding free and fair elections in the constituency.


== Campaign ==


=== Issues ===


==== Allegations of undermining institutions ====
The opposition parties accused the NDA government of destroying democratic institutions and processes. Modi denied these allegations, and blamed Congress and the communists for undermining institutions including the police, the CBI, and the CAG, and cited the murder of BJP activists in Kerala and Madhya Pradesh. The Congress party, along with other opposition parties and a group of retired civil servants, accused the ECI of being compromised, and implied that they endorsed the model code of conduct violations by Narendra Modi and other BJP political leaders during their campaigns. Another group of 81 retired civil servants, judges and academics disputed these allegations, made counter-allegations, and stated that the ECI acted fairly and similarly in alleged violations by either side. The group stated that such political attacks on the ECI were a "deliberate attempt to denigrate and delegitimise the democratic institutions".


==== Economic performance ====
According to The Times of India, the major economic achievements of the incumbent NDA government included an inflation rate less than 4 per cent, the GST reform, and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. Its programs, in recent years, that have positively touched many among the Indian masses, include the Jan Dhan Yojana, rural cooking gas and electricity for homes. According to the IMF, the Indian economy has been growing in recent years, its GDP growth rate is among the highest in the world for major economies, and India is expected to be the fastest growing major economy in 2019–2020 and 2020–2021, with real GDP projected to grow at 7.3 per cent. The GDP growth data has been disputed by a group of Indian social scientists, economists and the political opposition's election campaign, while a group of Indian chartered accountants has defended the data, the GDP calculation methodology, and questioned the motivations of those disputing the recent Indian GDP statistics.
The opposition's election campaign has claimed that both the demonetisation and GST law have "seriously hit small business, farmers and casual labour", states The Times of India. The incumbent has claimed that they inherited a country from the previous Congress-led government that was "a legacy of policy paralysis, corruption and economic fragility", and that the BJP-led government policies have placed India on better economic fundamentals and a fast gear. Modi claims that his government pursued demonetisation in the national interest, his government has identified and de-registered 338,000 shell companies, identified and recovered ₹130,000 crore (US$14 billion) in black money since 2014, and almost doubled India's tax base. The Congress party disputes the incumbents' claims, and has alleged that BJP offices have "become hubs of creating black money", and seeks a judicial inquiry into the Rafale deal with France and BJP's role in corruption.


==== National security and terrorism ====
In response to the 2019 Pulwama attack, the Indian Air Force conducted airstrikes inside Pakistan — for the first time since the 1971 Indo-Pakistani war. The ongoing conflict with Pakistan became a significant factor in the election. The opposition parties accused of politicising the army, whilst the BJP countered their accusations by stating that such allegations raised by them were adversely affecting the morale of armed forces.
According to the Pew Research Center, both before and after the outbreak of recent India-Pakistan tensions, their 2018 and 2019 surveys suggest that the significant majority of the voters consider Pakistan as a "very serious threat" to their country, and terrorism to be a "very big problem".


==== Unemployment ====

According to the Pew Research Center, a majority of Indian voters consider the lack of employment opportunities as a "very big problem" in their country. "About 18.6 million Indians were jobless and another 393.7 million work in poor-quality jobs vulnerable to displacement", stated the Pew report.
A report on unemployment prepared by the National Sample Survey Office's (NSSO's) periodic labour force survey, has not been officially released by the government. According to Business Today, this report is the "first comprehensive survey on employment conducted by a government agency after Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced demonetisation move in November 2016". According to this report, the 2017–2018 "usual status" unemployment rate in India is 6.1 per cent, which is a four-decade high. The government has claimed that the report was not final. According to the International Labour Organization (ILO) – a United Nations agency, unemployment is rising in India and the "unemployment rate in the country [India] will stand at 3.5 percent in 2018 and 2019 – the same level of unemployment seen in 2017 and 2016", instead of dropping to 3.4 per cent as it had previously projected. According to the ILO's World Employment Social Outlook Report, the unemployment rate in India has been in the 3.4 to 3.6 per cent range over the UPA-government led 2009–2014 and the NDA-government led 2014–2019 periods.
Opposition parties claimed in their election campaign that the unemployment in India had reached crisis levels. The NDA government has denied the existence of any job crisis. Prime minister Narendra Modi claimed that jobs are not lacking but the accurate data on jobs has been lacking.
The opposition has attacked the NDA government's performance with the NSSO reported 6.1 per cent unemployment data. Modi and his government have questioned this job statistics report, stating that "most surveys that try to capture unemployment rate are skewed since these did not cover the unorganised sector, which accounts for 85–90 per cent of jobs [in India]".


==== Agrarian and rural distress ====
The Congress party campaign highlighted "agrarian distress" as an election issue. The BJP campaign highlighted that the Congress party had been in power for five generations of the Nehru dynasty and its past promises and campaign issues have been empty. It claimed that the recent farmer loan waivers by Congress have not reached "even 10% of the farmers" nor has it helped the financial situation of the farmers. BJP highlights that its "Kisan Samman Nidhi" helps the small farmers at the time of seed planting through a direct deposit of ₹6000 to their accounts. The opposition accused this as being an attempt to lure voters.
According to The Times of India, a group of farmer associations demanded that the 2019 election manifesto of competing political parties should promise to "keep agriculture out of the World Trade Organization (WTO)" and that the interests of Indian farmers must not be compromised in global trade treaties. They also demanded loan waivers and income support for the agriculture sector. According to the Business Standard and the United Nation's Food and Agriculture Organization, India has witnessed record crop harvests in recent years including 2017 when its farmers grew more foodgrains than ever before. However, the farmers consider the "low remunerative prices" they receive in the free market to be too low and a need for the Indian government to establish higher minimum support prices for agricultural products. These farmers consider this an issue for the 2019 general elections.


==== Dynasty politics ====
The BJP highlighted that the Congress party has relied on Rahul Gandhi for leadership since 2013, its lack of internal party institutions and claimed that whenever Congress has been in power, the freedom of press and Indian government institutions have "taken a severe beating". During the election campaign, its leaders mentioned the Emergency of 1975, the nepotism, corruption and widespread abuses of human rights under the Congress rule in the past. Congress-led alliance leader H. D. Kumaraswamy – the son of a former prime minister of India and the former chief minister of Karnataka, countered that "India developed because of dynasty politics", stating that "dynasty politics are not the main issue, rather country's problems are". The Congress alleged hypocrisy by the BJP, claiming that the BJP itself forms alliances with dynasty-based parties such as the Akali Dal in Punjab, and that family relatives of senior BJP leaders such as Rajnath Singh and Arun Jaitley have been in politics too.
According to an IndiaSpend report published by the BloombergQuint, the smaller and regional parties such as the Jammu and Kashmir National Conference, Lok Jan Sakti Party, Shiromani Akali Dal, Biju Janata Dal and Samajwadi Party have higher densities of dynasty-derived candidates and elected representatives in recent years.  While both the Congress and the BJP have also nominated candidates from political dynasties, states the report, the difference between them is that in Congress "top party leadership has been handed down from generation to generation within the same [Nehru Gandhi dynasty] family", while there has been a historic non-dynastic diversity in the top leadership within the BJP. According to the report, while BJP has also nominated candidates from political dynasties, its better public relations operation "can leap to its defence when attacked on the same grounds". In contrast to the IndiaSpend report, analysis of Kanchan Chandra, a prominent professor of Politics, of the 2004, 2009 and 2014 general elections included a finding that the Congress party has had about twice or more dynastic parliamentarians than the BJP at those elections, and higher than all major political parties in India except the Samajwadi Party. Many of these dynastic politicians in India who inherit the leadership positions have never held any jobs and lack state or local experience, states Anjali Bohlken – a professor and political science scholar, and this raises concerns of rampant nepotism and appointments of their own friends, relatives and cronies if elected. The BJP targeted the Congress party in the 2019 elections for alleged nepotism and a family dynasty for leadership.


=== Campaign controversies ===


==== Income tax raids ====
In April 2019, raids conducted by the Income Tax Department found bundles of unaccounted for cash amounting to ₹281 crore (US$29 million), along with liquor and documentary evidence in premises of people with close connections to Madhya Pradesh chief minister Kamal Nath of the Congress.  Modi has highlighted this evidence to attack the Congress in its election campaign, alleging corruption is part of Congress party's culture.


==== Social media abuses and fake news ====
According to The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, the election attracted a systematic attempt to spread misinformation through social media. Facebook said that over a hundred of these advocacy accounts spreading disinformation were traced to "employees of the Pakistani military public relations wing". Some others have been linked to the INC and BJP.
Political parties spent over ₹53 crore (US$5.6 million) with the largest spending by BJP on digital platforms for online ads. The BJP placed 2,500 ads on Facebook while the Congress placed 3,686 ads. According to a study by Vidya Narayanan and colleagues at the Oxford Internet Institute, social media was used by all the major parties and alliances, and all of them linked or posted divisive and conspiratorial content and images. According to Narayanan, "a third of the BJP's images, a quarter of the INC's images, and a tenth the SP-BSP's images were catalogued as divisive and conspiratorial". The Narayanan et al. study added that "we observed very limited amounts of hate speech, gore or pornography in either platform samples" by BJP, Congress or SP-BSP, but the election did include proportionally more polarising information on social media than other countries except for the US presidential election in 2016.
About 50,000 fake news stories were published during the recent Lok Sabha elections and shared 2 million times, according to a study conducted by fact-checking startup Logically.
In September 2019, the BBC launched the Trusted News Initiative to help combat election-related disinformation, citing the 2019 general elections as a motivating factor.


==== ECI actions under Article 324 ====
The Election Commission of India (ECI) curtailed West Bengal's campaigning by one day, after a bust of 19th century Bengali icon Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was vandalised due to violence in the 7th phase of the election.


=== Party campaigns ===

12 January 2019 – Prime Minister Modi launched the BJP's election campaign.
14 February 2019 – The INC president Rahul Gandhi launched his campaign from Lal Dungri village in Gujarat's Dharampur.
24 March 2019 – The Aam Aadmi Party began its campaign in Delhi.
2 April 2019 – The Trinamool Congress party launched its campaign from Dinhata, Coochbehar.
7 April 2019 – Bahujan Samaj Party and Samajwadi Party began campaigning together as an alliance (Mahagathbandhan) along with regional parties such as the Rashtriya Lok Dal. Their first joint campaign started in Deoband in Saharanpur district of Uttar Pradesh.


=== Party manifestos ===


==== Highlights of the Congress manifesto ====
The Congress released its manifesto, titled Congress Will Deliver on 3 April. Some of its highlights:

Introduce a Nyuntam Aay Yojana welfare program wherein ₹72,000 (US$750) per year will be transferred directly to the bank account of a woman-member in each family in the poorest 20 per cent households.
Create 1 million "Seva Mitra" jobs in rural and urban local government bodies. Fill all 400,000 central government vacancies before March 2020, and encourage state governments to fill their 2,000,000 vacancies. Enact a law that requires all non-government controlled employers with over 100 employees to implement an apprentice program.
Enact a permanent National Commission on Agricultural Development and Planning and introduce a "Kisan Budget" (Farmer Budget) in the parliament every year. Waive all farmer loans in all states with any amounts outstanding.
Enact a Right to Homestead Act that will provide free land to every household that does not own a home.
Enact a Right to Healthcare Act and guarantee every citizen free diagnostics, free medicines, free hospitalisation, and free out-patient care. Double spending on healthcare to 3 per cent of its GDP by 2024.
Double spending on education to 6 per cent of its GDP by 2024.
Revise the national GST law from three tax tiers to a single moderate rate of tax. Reduce taxes on exported products to zero. Exempt from the GST essential goods and services that are currently not exempt. Enact a new Direct Taxes Code.
Augment and rapid construction of national highways. Modernise Indian railway infrastructure. Promote green energy. Manufacturing promotion.
Increase defence spending.
Enact a National Election Fund, wherein public funds will be distributed to recognised political parties to run their campaign
Preserve special status and special rights to natives of Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 and 35A.
Amend the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958. End the Sedition law (Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code).


==== Highlights of the BJP manifesto ====
The BJP released its manifesto sub-titled Sankalpit Bharat, Sashakt Bharat (lit. 'Resolute India, Empowered India') on 8 April. Some of its highlights:

Implementation of a nationwide National Register of Citizens (NRC) to identify & deport undocumented immigrants, an immigrant being defined in this context as a person who is unable to provide documentary evidence of his/her residency in India prior to 26 March 1971 or that of his/her immediate ancestors (parents & grandparents) in case of being born after the previously mentioned date, preceded by an amendment in citizenship laws that will allow only undocumented Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi, and Christian immigrants from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan who entered India before 31 December 2014 to automatically obtain Indian citizenship.
End the special autonomous status of Jammu and Kashmir and the special rights granted to its citizens as per Article 370 of the Indian constitution.
Double farmer incomes by 2022 via the completion of major and micro-irrigation infrastructure projects, open adequate markets and modern farm produce storage centres, implement minimum price supports for farmer produce, farmer loans, and construct of all-weather rural roads. Introduce a pension bill for small and marginal farmers to provide social security after 60 years of age.
Bring all secondary schools under the national board quality purview. Invest ₹100,000 crore (US$10 billion) in higher education, open new and increase seats at existing engineering, management and law schools. Establish skills and innovations centre at block-level in every town. Enhance higher education opportunities for women by introducing financial support and subsidies programs. Source 10 per cent of government procurement from companies with more than 50 per cent female employees.
Ensure a pucca (lit. 'Solid'  or 'Durable') house, with safe potable water, toilet, LPG gas cylinder, electricity, and banking account for every family in the country. Reduce the percentage of families living under the poverty line to a single digit by 2024.
Double the length of national highways. Improve fuel quality by mandating 10 per cent ethanol in petrol. Scale renewable energy capacity to 175 GW.
Electrify and convert to broad gauge all railway tracks.
Establish 150,000 health and wellness centres. Start 75 new medical colleges. Raise doctor-to-population ratio to 1:1400. Triple childcare facilities. Achieve 100 per cent immunisation of all babies.
Raise India's ranking further in "ease of doing business". Double exports, introduce single-window compliance procedures for all businesses.
Reduce air pollution by eliminating all crop residue burning.
Digitise paperwork and proceedings, modernise the courts.
Launch and promote a National Digital Library with e-books and leading journals to provide free knowledge accessible to all students. Launch a "Study in India" program to bring foreign students to institutes of higher education.
Privatisation of defence, space and agriculture sector for development of India.
Zero tolerance for terrorism, fund resources to strengthen national security, guarantee veterans and soldier welfare, modernise police forces.


==== Other parties ====
Other national and regional parties released their manifestos too:

The Tamil Nadu-based regional parties AIADMK and DMK released their manifesto on 18 March 2019, with each promising to release the seven Tamils jailed after being found guilty for their role in the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, a former Congress party leader and prime minister of India. The AIADMK promised to press for the political rights of the Tamil people in the Eelam region of Sri Lanka, while the DMK has promised Indian citizenship to all Sri Lankan expats. According to the Deccan Herald, the AIADMK has promised a cash transfer of ₹18,000 (US$190) per year to "all families below the poverty level, destitute women, widows without income, differently-abled, landless agricultural labourers, rural and urban manual labourers and destitute senior citizens". The AIADMK also promised to raise the tax exemption limit and revisions to the GST law. The DMK promised a probe into Rafale fighter jet deal, and a plan to distribute free sanitary napkins to working women along with starting martial arts schools for girls.
Biju Janata Dal (BJD) released its manifesto on 9 April 2019. It promised a ₹100,000 (US$1,000) zero-interest crop loan to farmers every year, a ₹500,000 (US$5,200) zero-interest loan to women-run self-help groups, 75 per cent jobs reservation in Odisha-based companies to Odisha youth, free education to all girls and a marriage assistance grant of ₹25,000 (US$260) to daughters of poor families. It also promised to complete two expressways.
Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPIM) manifesto promised to raise the minimum wage to ₹216,000 (US$2,300) per year, an old age pension of ₹72,000 (US$750) per year and universal public distribution of 35 kilograms of foodgrains per family. It also stated the restoration of inheritance tax and an increase in the taxes on individuals and corporations. It also promised spending 6 per cent of GDP on education, enacting a Right to Free Health Care with 3.5 per cent of GDP on health in the short term and 5 per cent in the long term, introduction of price controls on essential drugs, breaking monopoly of drug multinationals, as well as enact a Right to Guaranteed Employment in urban areas.
Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) promised to open talks with Pakistan on terrorism. It also promised to expand trade and political relationship with Russia, and seek to weaken Russia's ties with China and Pakistan.
Samajwadi Party promised an annual pension of ₹36,000 (US$380) to poor families in a form of a cash transfer to women. It has also proposed a new property tax of 2 per cent on homes valued above ₹25,000,000 (US$260,000) as well as raising income taxes on the affluent. It also promised to create 100,000 new jobs every year.
Telugu Desam Party released its manifesto on 5 April 2019. It promised zero-interest loans to farmer without any caps, a grant of ₹15,000 (US$160) per year to each farmer as investment support, a grant of ₹100,000 (US$1,000) to each family with a daughter in the year of her marriage, an unemployment allowance of ₹3,000 (US$31) for any youth who has completed intermediate education, and free laptops to all students at the intermediate level.
AITMC's manifesto was released on 27 March 2019. It promised a judicial probe into demonetisation, a review of GST law, and sought to bring back the Planning Commission. It also promised free medical care, expanding the "100-day work scheme" currently operating in India to "200-day work scheme" along with a pay increase.
Aam Aadmi Party released its manifesto on 25 April 2019 promising full statehood for Delhi to give the Delhi government control over police and other institutions. The manifesto promised 85 per cent reservations in the Delhi-based colleges and jobs for the voters of Delhi and their families.


=== Campaign finance ===
Several organisations offered varying estimates for the cost of the election campaign. The Centre for Media Studies in New Delhi estimated that the election campaign could exceed $7 billion. According to the Association for Democratic Reforms (ADR), an election watchdog, in the financial year 2017–18 BJP received ₹4,370,000,000 (US$46 million), about 12 times more donations than Congress and five other national parties combined.
The electoral bonds in denominations ranging from 1,000 rupees to 10 million rupees ($14 to $140,000) can be purchased and donated to a political party. The bonds don't carry the name of the donor and are exempt from tax. Factly – an India data journalism portal, traced the electoral bond donations for 2018 under India's Right to Information Act. According to Factly, electoral bonds worth about ₹10,600,000,000 (US$110 million) were purchased and donated in 2018. According to Bloomberg, this accounted for 31.2 per cent of political donations in 2018, while 51.4 per cent of the total donated amount were each below ₹20,000 (US$210) and these too were from unknown donors. About 47 per cent of the donations to political parties were from known sources. Between 1 January and 31 March 2019, donors bought ₹17,100,000,000 (US$180 million) worth of electoral bonds and donated. The spending in elections boosts national GDP, and the 2009 election spending contributed about 0.5 per cent to GDP.
According to the Centre for Media Studies, the BJP spent over ₹280 billion (or 45%) of the ₹600 billion spent by all political parties during the polls. Congress questioned the BJP over its poll expenditure.


== Parties and alliances ==


=== Political alliances ===

With the exception of 2014, no single party has won the majority of seats in the Lok Sabha since 1984, and therefore, forming alliances is the norm in Indian elections.
There were three main national pre-poll alliances. They are the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) headed by the BJP, the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) headed by the INC and the Left Front of the communist leaning parties.
The INC did not form alliances in states where it was in direct contest with the BJP. These states included Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Chhattisgarh. It formed alliances with regional parties in Jammu and Kashmir, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Jharkhand, and Kerala.
The left parties, most notably the Communist Party of India (Marxist) contested on its own in its strongholds West Bengal, Tripura and Kerala, confronting both NDA and UPA. In Tamil Nadu, it was part of the Secular Progressive Alliance led by DMK while it was allied with the Jana Sena Party in Andhra Pradesh.
In January 2019, Bahujan Samaj Party and Samajwadi Party announced a grand alliance (Mahagathbandhan) to contest 76 out of the 80 seats in Uttar Pradesh leaving two seats, namely Amethi and Rae Bareli, for INC and another two for other political parties.


=== Political parties ===
More than 650 parties contested in these elections. Most of them were small with regional appeal. The main parties were the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the Indian National Congress (INC) and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)). This was the first time that BJP (437) contested more seats than Congress (421) in the Lok Sabha elections.


== Candidates ==

Altogether 8,039 candidates were in the fray for 542 parliamentary constituencies, i.e., 14.8 candidates per constituency on an average, according to PRS India, an NGO.
About 40% of the candidates fielded by the Bharatiya Janata Party had a criminal case against them. The key opposition party Indian National Congress was not far behind with 39% of the candidates having criminal charges while the proportion exceeded 50% for some political parties, according to the Association of Democratic Reforms analysis.


== Voter statistics ==
According to the ECI, 900 million people were eligible to vote, with an increase of 84.3 million voters since the last election in 2014, making it the largest-ever election in the world. 15 million voters aged 18–19 years became eligible to vote for the first time. 468 million eligible voters were males, 432 million were females and 38,325 identified themselves belonging to third gender. Total 71,735 overseas voters also enrolled.
The residents of the former enclaves exchanged under the 2015 India-Bangladesh boundary agreement voted for the first time.


=== Electronic voting machines and security ===
The ECI deployed a total of 1.74 million voter-verified paper audit trail (VVPAT) units and 3.96 million electronic voting machines (EVM) in 1,035,918 polling stations. Approximately 270,000 paramilitary and 2 million state police personnel provided organisational support and security at various polling booths. On 9 April 2019, the Supreme Court ordered the ECI to increase VVPAT slips vote count to five randomly selected EVMs per assembly constituency, which meant that the ECI had to count VVPAT slips of 20,625 EVMs before it could certify the final election results.


=== Voting ===
In the first phase, 69.58 per cent of the 142 million eligible voters cast their vote to elect their representatives for 91 Lok Sabha seats. The voter turnout was 68.77 per cent in the same constituencies in the 2014 general elections. In the second phase, 156 million voters were eligible to vote for 95 Lok Sabha seats and the turnout was 69.45 per cent, compared to 69.62 per cent in 2014. For the third phase, 189 million voters were eligible to elect 116 Lok Sabha representatives. According to ECI, the turnout for this phase was 68.40 per cent, compared to 67.15 per cent in 2014. In the fourth of seven phases, 65.50 per cent of the 128 million eligible voters cast their vote to elect 72 representatives to the Indian parliament while the turnout for the same seats in the 2014 election was 63.05 per cent. The fifth phase was open to 87.5 million eligible voters, who could cast their vote in over 96,000 polling booths. In the sixth phase, 64.40 per cent of the 101 million eligible voters cast their vote in about 113,000 polling stations.


== Turnout ==
The final turnout stood at 67.11 per cent, the highest ever turnout recorded in any of the general elections till date. The percentage is 1.16 per cent higher than the 2014 elections whose turnout stood at 65.95 per cent. Over 600 million voters polled their votes in 2019 Indian General elections.


=== Phase-wise voter turnout details ===


=== State/UT-wise voter turnout details ===


== Surveys and polls ==


=== Opinion polls ===


=== Exit polls ===


== Results ==


== Aftermath ==


=== Reactions ===


==== National ====
Congress party leaders, such as Rahul Gandhi and others, conceded defeat and congratulated Modi and his party. Other opposition parties and political leaders such as Sharad Pawar, Mamata Banerjee, and Omar Abdullah, congratulated Modi and the BJP for their victory.
On 20 November 2019, the Association for Democratic Reforms filed a petition with the Supreme Court of India over alleged ballot-counting discrepancies in the Lok Sabha voting and seeking a probe by the ECI.


==== International ====
The leaders of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, China, Comoros, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Lichtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, North Korea, Nigeria, New Zealand, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Portugal, Qatar, Russia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Sri Lanka, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe congratulated Narendra Modi and the BJP on their victory.


=== Government formation ===


=== Swearing-in ceremony ===


=== Impact ===
The benchmark BSE Sensex and Nifty50 indices hit intraday record highs and the Indian rupee strengthened after the exit polls and on the day the election results were announced.


== Timeline ==


== See also ==
List of members of the 17th Lok Sabha
2019 Rajya Sabha elections
2019 elections in India
Politics of India Category:2019 Indian general election by state or union territory


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Surjit S. Bhalla. Citizen Raj: Indian Elections 1952-2019 (2019 Buy Citizen Raj: Indian Elections 1952-2019 Book Online at Low Prices in India | Citizen Raj: Indian Elections 1952-2019 Reviews & Ratings - Amazon.in
Prannoy Roy, Dorab R. Sopariwala. The Verdict: Decoding India's Elections (2019) The Verdict


== External links ==
 Media related to 2019 Indian general election at Wikimedia Commons

The 2022 SCO summit was the 22nd annual summit of heads of state of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation held between 15 and 16 September 2022 in Samarkand, Uzbekistan.


== Proceedings ==
As part of the meetings, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and Chinese president Xi Jinping met with Russian president Vladimir Putin. During the meeting, Putin acknowledged that the Chinese side had "concerns and questions" over Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Putin also met with Indian prime minister Narendra Modi. During the meeting, Modi said that "today's era is not of war".
The leaders of Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan met to discuss the 2022 Kyrgyzstan–Tajikistan clashes which escalated during the summit.
Iran formally submitted its application to join the SCO as a full member state, which is expected to become effective within a year.
Turkey also announced its intention to join in the future.


== Member states leaders and other dignitaries in attendance ==


=== Member states ===

 China – General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and President of China Xi Jinping
 India – Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi
 Kazakhstan – President of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev
 Kyrgyzstan – President of the Kyrgyz Republic Sadyr Japarov
 Pakistan – Prime Minister of Pakistan Shehbaz Sharif
 Russia – President of Russia Vladimir Putin
 Tajikistan – President of Tajikistan Emomali Rahmon
 Uzbekistan – President of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev


=== Observer states ===
 Belarus – President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko
 Iran – President of Iran Ebrahim Raisi
 Mongolia – President of Mongolia Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh


=== Invited guests ===
 Azerbaijan – President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev
 Turkey – President of Türkiye Recep Tayyip Erdogan
 Turkmenistan – President of Turkmenistan Serdar Berdimuhamedow


=== International organizations ===
 Collective Security Treaty Organization
 Commonwealth of Independent States
 Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia
Economic Cooperation Organization
 Eurasian Economic Union
 United Nations


== References ==

The 2024 SCO summit was the 24th annual summit of heads of state of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation held between 3 and 4 July 2024 in Astana, Kazakhstan.


== Member states leaders and other dignitaries in attendance ==


=== Member states ===
 Belarus – President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko
 China – President of China and CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping
 India – Minister of External Affairs S. Jaishankar
 Iran – President of Iran Masoud Pezeshkian
 Kazakhstan – President of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev
 Kyrgyzstan – President of the Kyrgyz Republic Sadyr Japarov
 Pakistan – Prime Minister of Pakistan Shehbaz Sharif
 Russia – President of Russia Vladimir Putin
 Tajikistan – President of Tajikistan Emomali Rahmon
 Uzbekistan – President of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev


=== Observer states ===
 Mongolia – President of Mongolia Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh


=== Invited guests ===
 Azerbaijan – President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev
 Qatar – Emir of Qatar Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani
 Turkey – President of Türkiye Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
 Turkmenistan – Chairman of People's Council of Turkmenistan Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow
 UAE – Ruler of Emirate of Ras Al Khaimah Saud bin Saqr Al Qasimi


=== International organizations ===
 United Nations – Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres


== See also ==
2024 SCO summit (Heads of government)


== Notes ==


== References ==

The 2024 BRICS Games, also known as the 2024 BRICS Sports Games, was an international multi-sport competition running from 12 to 23 June 2024 in Kazan, Russia, organized by countries belonging to the economic association BRICS, and was held in Kazan in connection with Russia's chairmanship of BRICS in 2024.


== Schedule ==
The games officially took place from 12 June to 23 June 2024 (from 11 June to 25 June including related events). The opening ceremony took place on Wednesday the 12 June 2024, while events such as tennis and rowing had preliminary rounds on the 11 June. 


== Participants ==
More than 60 countries were invited to participate. As of 1 June 2024, representatives from 97 countries confirmed their participation; at the opening ceremony on 12 June, participants from 89 countries were announced. According to the online publication Mediazona, the leaked lists of accommodation of athletes in hotels and dormitories on the campus of the Kazan (Volga region) Federal University indicate that representatives of 37 foreign states were registered, including from partially recognized states Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Taiwan (as Chinese Taipei), and the subnational entity Republika Srpska. Foreign students studying at Russian universities also participated. The largest delegations were from Russia, Brazil and China. It was noted that most countries sent weaker teams, with the exception of Russia, Belarus, and Brazil. However, only 80 delegations were present. 23 delegations only took part in events in Moscow. Chad, Romania, and Lithuania were initially listed as participants in Koresh belt wrestling, but eventually did not participate; their planned matches remained on the tournament records.


=== Absent delegations in Koresh tournament record ===


=== Delegations only have official ===


=== Absent delegations ===
The delegations was registered in at least one sport but eventually absent.


== Organization ==
The BRICS Games were used by Russian athletes as an alternative to participation in the 2024 Summer Olympics, where the country is not allowed to attend by decision of the International Olympic Committee (with the exception of a small number of individual athletes in non-team disciplines) due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and various doping in Russia controversies. The 2024 BRICS games were several times larger than all previous BRICS games – 387 sets of medals were awarded in 27 sports, while the next-largest BRICS games were the 2023 edition in South Africa where only five sports were contested.
A total of 1,276 medals were awarded to the 2,970 participants (0.43 medal per participant) including 509 medals to the 641 participants from the Russian delegation (0.79 medal per participant). This compares to the 1,080 medals awarded to the 11,420 participants in the Tokyo 2020 (0.09 medal per participant).
1.8 billion rubles were allocated for the competitions and 5 billion rubles were allocated to prepare the infrastructure. 358.4 thousand rubles were allocated in prize money for gold medal-winners, 179.2 thousand rubles for silver, and 107.5 thousand rubles for bronze medallists. The games' competitions involve 17 sports facilities and provide 95 thousand tickets for spectators.
The opening ceremony was held on 12 June 2024 in the concert hall of the international exhibition complex Kazan Expo with the participation of the Minister of Sports of the Russian Federation M. Degtyarev and the head of the Republic of Tatarstan R. Minnikhanov in the presence of athletes and official guests without ordinary spectators. Instead of the closing ceremony on June 23, 2024, participation of athletes and guests participate in the Sabantuy festival on the closing of the Games.
The mascot of the games is the leopard Bricsic. The logo of the games is a rectangle with the text BRICS (letters in blue, red, orange, green and yellow) at the top, the words GAMES (in red) and a stylized tulip with the Kazan Syuyumbike tower (in green) in the middle and the numbers 2024 (in red) with the text "RUSSIA•KAZAN" (in black) below. The games are presented by ambassadors led by figure skater Alina Zagitova, football player Gökdeniz Karadeniz, saber fencer Sofia Velikaya, and gymnast Yana Batyrshina.
The main broadcasters of the games are the television and radio companies Match TV and TNV.


== Sports ==
There were 27 sports contested at the 2024 BRICS Games.
Results: 


== Medal table ==
The medal tally is maintained by the BRICS Games website. The table shown is provided as-is from the website.

  *   Host nation (Russia)


== See also ==
University International Sports Festival – in Yekaterinburg, Russia from 19 August 2023 to 31 August 2023.
Games of the Future – in Kazan, Russia from 21 February to 3 March 2024.
2024 World Friendship Games – in Moscow and Yekaterinburg, Russia from 15 to 29 September 2024.
Intervision 2025


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website

General elections were held in India from 19 April to 1 June 2024 in seven phases, to elect all 543 members of the Lok Sabha. Votes were counted and the result was declared on 4 June to form the 18th Lok Sabha. On 7 June 2024, Prime Minister Narendra Modi confirmed the support of 293 MPs to Droupadi Murmu, the president of India. This marked Modi's third term as prime minister and his first time heading a coalition government, with the Telugu Desam Party of Andhra Pradesh and Janata Dal (United) of Bihar emerging as two main allies.
More than 968 million people out of a population of 1.4 billion people were eligible to vote, equivalent to 70 percent of the total population. 642 million voters participated in the election; 312 million of these were women, the highest ever participation by women voters. This was the largest-ever election, surpassing the previous election, and lasted 44 days, second only to the 1951–52 Indian general election. The legislative assembly elections in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha, and Sikkim were held simultaneously with the general election, along with the by-elections for 25 constituencies in 12 legislative assemblies.
Incumbent prime minister Narendra Modi, who completed a second term, ran for a third consecutive term. His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) had enjoyed an absolute majority—a minimum of 272 seats—in the 2014 and 2019 elections. The primary opposition was the Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance (INDIA), a coalition formed in 2023 by the Indian National Congress (INC) and many regional parties. The election was criticised for lack of action on hate speeches by Modi's BJP, reported electronic voting machine (EVM) malfunctioning, and suppression of political opponents of the BJP.
Opinion surveys of mainstream media outlets projected a decisive victory for the BJP and its coalition, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). However, the BJP won 240 seats, down from the 303 it had secured in 2019, and lost its singular majority in the Lok Sabha, although the NDA overall secured 293 of the house's 543 seats. The INDIA coalition outperformed expectations, securing 234 seats, 99 of which were won by the Congress, garnering the party the official opposition status for the first time in 10 years. Seven independents and ten candidates from non-aligned parties also won seats in the Lok Sabha.
According to the national data from the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS) – Lokniti National Election Studies published in The Hindu, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) maintained a 3 percentage point lead in the overall national vote share (43% to 40%) over the INDIA alliance. The NDA maintained its strongest age advantage among young voters aged 18–25, capturing 46% of their vote compared to 33% for the INDIA bloc, The INDIA alliance performed best among non-literate voters, leading the NDA by 42% to 38%, whereas the NDA's support scaled up with higher education and economic affluence, peaking at 45% among graduates and 46% among the wealthiest class. Geographically, the spatial divide showed the NDA dominating large metropolitan cities and urban zones with a 45% vote share, but while the NDA bloc surged into a lead in small, semi-urban towns (42% to 41%), rural villages remained highly competitive with the NDA retaining a narrow 42% to 41% edge overall. In terms of communities, the NDA maintained a massive upper-caste Hindu anchor (61%) and held comfortable margins among Other Backward Classes (OBCs), while Scheduled Castes (Dalits) tied perfectly at 31% for both coalitions. Religious minorities, esoecially Muslims, heavily consolidated behind the opposition, with 65% of Muslims voting for the INDIA alliance,


== Background ==


=== Contemporary politics and previous elections ===
India has a multi-party system with two major parties, namely the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Indian National Congress (INC), that dominate politics at the national level. The BJP has governed the country with Narendra Modi at the helm since 2014. The tenure of the 17th Lok Sabha was scheduled to end on 16 June 2024. The previous general election was held in April–May 2019, after which the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), led by the BJP, formed the union government, with Modi continuing as Prime Minister. The Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance, comprising 26 opposition parties, was formed in 2023 to compete against the NDA in the elections.


=== Electoral system ===

Article 83 of the Constitution of India requires elections to the Lok Sabha to be held once every five years. The 543 MPs are elected from single-member constituencies using first-past-the-post voting. The 104th amendment to the constitution abolished the two seats that were reserved for the Anglo-Indian community.
Indian citizens who are 18 years or older, ordinary residents of the polling area of the constituency and registered to vote (name included in the electoral rolls), possess a valid voter identification card issued by the Election Commission of India or equivalent are eligible to vote. People convicted of electoral or other offenses and prisoners, are barred from voting. Indians holding foreign citizenship are not eligible to vote in India. There is no postal or online absentee voting in India; members of the Indian diaspora are required to travel back to their home constituencies in order to cast a ballot.
For the 2024 election, 968 million people were eligible to vote, an increase of about 150 million people from the 2019 election. In Arunachal Pradesh, a polling station would be set up for the only registered voter in the village of Malogam, as electoral laws stipulate that voting booths need to be within two kilometres (1.2 mi) of any settlement. A polling station was also set up inside the Gir Forest in Gujarat to cater for a single voter, a priest at a Hindu temple. Polling stations were also set up inside a wildlife sanctuary in Kerala, in a shipping container in Gujarat, and 320 relief camps hosting nearly 59,000 people displaced during violence in Manipur.
In March 2024, the Supreme Court of India rejected a petition by the Congress party to end the usage of electronic voting machines (EVMs) and revert to paper ballots and manual counting, which was the system used in elections until the late 1990s, with the party citing risks of electoral fraud. Nearly 5.5 million EVMs were utilized in more than one million polling stations with 15 million election workers and security personnel tasked with managing the conduct of the election.
For the first time, the Election Commission of India allowed voters with disabilities and those over the age of 85 to cast ballots from their homes. In Telangana, voting in some areas was extended by an hour more to allow voters to come at a more convenient time.


=== Planning ===
Key processes during a Lok Sabha election involved monitoring campaign expenditure, preventing the circulation of illicit goods, and ensuring adherence to the Model Code of Conduct. In the final 48 hours before voting, campaigns are ceased, and measures are implemented to maintain order and prevent disruptions. On polling day, strict rules are enforced to prevent undue influence and ensure a secure and free election process. After the elections, EVMs are sealed and stored under tight security with Booth Level Officers assisting throughout the process.


== Schedule ==

The election schedule for the 18th Lok Sabha was announced by the Election Commission of India on 16 March 2024 and with it the Model Code of Conduct came into effect. The tenure of the 17th Lok Sabha was scheduled to end on 16 June 2024.


=== Date summary ===


=== Seat summary ===


== Parties and alliances ==

The politics of India became increasingly bipolar in the run-up to the 2024 Indian general elections with two major alliances emerging; the incumbent National Democratic Alliance (NDA) and the opposition Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance (INDIA). Six parties recognized as national parties contested the 2024 Indian general elections: the BJP, the INC, Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)), Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), National People's Party (NPP) and Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) with all except the BSP being a part of one of the two alliances. Apart from the national parties, regional parties (who are allotted fixed symbols) and other unrecognized parties and independents contested the election.


=== National Democratic Alliance (NDA) ===

The NDA is a big tent, mostly centre-right to right-wing political alliance led by the BJP.


=== Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance (INDIA) ===

INDIA is a big tent bloc of opposition parties, which came together to contest against the NDA.

INDIA parties seat-sharing

INDIA parties under regional coalition/outside the alliance


=== Other notable parties and alliances ===
BSP leader Mayawati announced that her party will contest the election on its own in most states and ally with other non-BJP, non-Congress parties in a few states. On 11 May 2023, Biju Janata Dal leader and then Chief Minister of Odisha Naveen Patnaik said that his party would go alone for the Lok Sabha polls in Odisha after talks with the BJP fell through.


== Candidates ==
Incumbent Prime Minister Narendra Modi was announced as the prime ministerial candidate of the NDA. The INDIA bloc announced that the alliance will decide the Prime Minister after the polls.


=== National Democratic Alliance ===

The BJP announced its first list of 195 candidates on 2 March 2024 and the second list of 72 candidates was published in 13 March, while the third list of nine candidates was announced on 21 March. The fourth list of 15 candidates was released on 22 March, followed by the declaration of fifth list of 111 candidates on 24 March. Ultimately, the twentieth list of one candidate was released on 10 May.
For the first time since 1996, the BJP did not field candidates in the Kashmir division, with analysts and opposition politicians attributing it to popular backlash over the BJP government's revocation of Jammu and Kashmir's autonomy enshrined under Article 370 of the Indian Constitution in 2019. Despite not having a formal candidate, BJP maintains a presence in the region through their support of local parties 


=== Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance ===

The Congress released its first list of 39 candidates on 8 March 2024. Eventually, the twenty-eighth list of one candidate was announced on 7 May.
The All India Trinamool Congress (AITC) announced its list of 42 candidates for the West Bengal parliamentary seats on 10 March. In the Left Front, the CPI(M) announced its list first list of 44 candidates contesting from 13 different states on 28 March.


== Major election issues ==


=== Unemployment ===
The issue of unemployment has been a major problem for the Indian economy, especially affecting the youth. Unemployment in India has been at a 45-year old high. According to a 2022 World Bank report, India's youth unemployment rate stood at 23.2%, whereas the national unemployment hovered around 7%. In 2023, 42.3% of graduates were unemployed, showing the lack of job growth needed to accommodate the increasing workforce.
Unemployment took a centre stage in the election campaigns, with the opposition Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance criticising the BJP government's handling of the Indian economy for rising inflation, inequality and unemployment. As a part of its separate youth manifesto, the Congress-led INDIA bloc promised to fill in the 3 million vacancies in government jobs and bring in the "Right to Apprenticeship", in which any diploma and degree holder up to the age of 25 can demand employment for one year and they will get a one-year salary of ₹100,000 for the term of the job.


=== Ram Mandir consecration ceremony and sectarianism ===
The BJP prepared a pamphlet for the Ram Mandir Inauguration Programmes to connect with families across the nation. After the consecration of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya, a new era of Hindu nationalistic sentiments have dominated the political sphere in India. Modi kept a long-standing political pledge of the reconstruction of the Ram Mandir and was seen to have fulfilled the BJP's manifesto to the nation's Hindu population. The Hindu nationalist ideology of Modi and the BJP has also garnered substantial support from Hindu community members. At the same time, Bollywood productions have been released with themes supporting the Modi government's policies and Hindu nationalist ideologies. In response to such concerns, BJP spokesperson Mmhonlumo Kikon acknowledged the existence of a "level of threat perception", but said that the party was trying to change that.
A major controversy was stirred when the opposition Congress Party and its leaders declined an invitation to the Ram Mandir consecration ceremony, saying that the event was politicised into a 'BJP-RSS event'. Assam chief minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said that the invitation was an opportunity for the Congress to 'reduce its sin', and that history would continue to judge it as 'anti-Hindu'. The four Shankaracharyas also declined attending the event, stating that the ceremony was politicised as a campaign event at the half-built temple.
During a campaign rally in Rajasthan on 21 April, Narendra Modi accused the Congress party of prioritizing Muslim access to national wealth and planning to distribute resources among "those who have more children" and "infiltrators" once it was in power, which reflected stereotypes about Muslims reproducing in greater numbers and conspiracy theories pushed by the BJP that Muslims were planning to outnumber Hindus. Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge called Modi's remarks a panic-filled "hate speech" and a ploy to divert attention from the opposition outperforming the BJP during the first phase of the election, while officials in Rajasthan received complaints from the Azad Adhikar Sena and a non-profit organisation demanding Modi's arrest and for his campaign to be suspended.
A complaint letter by the Samvidhan Bacchao Nagrik Abhiyan (Save the Constitution Citizens' Campaign) organisation to the Election Commission of India, signed by over 17,400 people, alleged that Modi had violated the Model Code of Conduct and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 by making a speech "aiming at not only appealing to 'communal feelings' but also instigating and aggravating hatred in the Hindus against Muslims".


=== Electoral Bonds ===
On 15 February 2024, the Supreme Court of India ruled that the Electoral Bond system of campaign financing that was introduced by the Modi government in 2017 which allowed individuals and companies to donate money to political parties anonymously and without limits was unconstitutional, saying that the process allowed donors to assert "influence over policymaking". On 18 March, the court ordered the State Bank of India (SBI) to provide all records regarding the electoral bonds to the Election Commission of India by 21 March in order to match electoral donors with their recipients and rejected a plea by the Confederation of Indian Industry, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, and the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India from divulging the identities of donors. Initial reports suggest that among the leading donors to political parties were some of India's largest firms such as Vedanta Limited, Bharti Airtel, RPSG Group and Essel Mining. It also found that the BJP was the recipient of nearly half of all recorded donations.
In total, the top five political parties in terms of electoral bonds received are the BJP, which received Rs 6,060.5 crore, the All India Trinamool Congress (TMC), which received Rs 1,609.5 crore, the Congress Party, with Rs 1,421.8 crore, the Bharat Rashtra Samithi (BRS), which received Rs 1,214.7 crore, and the Biju Janata Dal (BJD), which received Rs 775.5 crore. The biggest buyer of electoral bonds was found to be Santiago Martin, the Tamil Nadu-based head of the lottery firm Future Gaming and Hotel Services Private Limited, who bought bonds worth 13.68 billion rupees ($163 million) between 2020 and 2024 and made donations to the TMC, the BJP, and the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), which rules Tamil Nadu. The biggest single donor to any political party was Megha Engineering and Infrastructure Limited (MEIL), a construction firm based in Hyderabad that bought electoral bonds worth over 12 billion rupees ($144 million) between 2019 and 2024 and made donations to the Bharat Rashtra Samithi (BRS), the BJP, and the Congress Party, who alternated in ruling Telangana during that time.
Some politicians from the opposition have termed Electoral Bonds a "scam" and an "extortion racket". In response to allegations regarding the electoral bonds, BJP spokesperson Syed Zafar Islam denied that the party had done any wrongdoing and said that its electoral bonds were gained "on merit". However, Indian political observers have reached the conclusion that either Indian businessmen have been regularly bribing their way out of trouble, or that the BJP-controlled government has been using government agencies to extort them. From the data released by the SBI, it was found that companies gave donations around the time they received major government contracts. Close to half of the top 30 corporate donors were facing investigations by government agencies around the time they purchased electoral bonds.


== Party campaigns ==


=== Bharatiya Janata Party ===

The national executive meeting of the BJP held on 16 and 17 January 2023 saw the party reaffirm its faith in Prime Minister Narendra Modi and extend the tenure of BJP national president J. P. Nadda.
Charting out the BJP's strategy for the upcoming polls, Modi said in a speech to party workers that they should reach out to every section of society, including the marginalised and minority communities, "without electoral considerations".
Following the 2023 Legislative Assembly elections, Modi debuted the slogan "Modi Ki Guarantee" for the 2024 polls. Another slogan used was Abki Baar 400 Paar (This Time Surpassing 400), referring to the party's goal of winning more than 400 out of 543 seats in the Lok Sabha. Having been used by the BJP in previous elections, including the 2019 general election with some changes, election analysts have said that the path for the BJP to achieve this goal will likely be by winning more seats in the south of India than in previous elections.
The party held political rallies in multiple states with national leadership including Modi, BJP President J. P. Nadda and Amit Shah campaigning actively.
During a campaign rally, Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath described the election as a contest between "devotees of Ram" and "anti-Ram forces" and urged voters to select the former. Modi also accused the opposition of plotting to raze the Ram Temple once they were in power.
During a campaign rally in Rajasthan on 21 April, Narendra Modi accused the Congress party of prioritizing Muslim access to national wealth and planning to distribute resources among "those who have more children" and "infiltrators" once it was in power, which reflected stereotypes about Muslims reproducing in greater numbers and conspiracy theories pushed by the BJP that Muslims were planning to outnumber Hindus. Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge called Modi's remarks a panic-filled "hate speech" and a ploy to divert attention from the opposition outperforming the BJP during the first phase of the election, while officials in Rajasthan received complaints from the Azad Adhikar Sena and a non-profit organisation demanding Modi's arrest and for his campaign to be suspended. Following Modi's speech, the BJP posted an animated video on its official Instagram account reiterating Modi's claims and showing Rahul Gandhi holding a copy of the Congress Party's election manifesto that morphs into the symbol of the All-India Muslim League. After being flagged by multiple users, the video was taken down less than 24 hours after its publication. A similar video posted on X towards voters in Karnataka was also ordered taken down by the Electoral Commission and led to police opening cases against senior BJP leaders.
A complaint letter by the Samvidhan Bacchao Nagrik Abhiyan (Save the Constitution Citizens' Campaign) organisation to the Election Commission of India, signed by over 17,400 people, alleged that Modi had violated the Model Code of Conduct and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 by making a speech "aiming at not only appealing to 'communal feelings' but also instigating and aggravating hatred in the Hindus against Muslims".
On 14 April 2024, the BJP invited foreign diplomats posted in the country as well as 25 overseas political parties including the Conservative and the Labour parties of the United Kingdom, the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) and the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), as well as the Awami League of Bangladesh to observe the party's electoral campaign. This initiative was part of the "Know BJP" campaign, aimed at external outreach and familiarisation with the election process. As part of this program, BJP president J. P. Nadda met with envoys from 13 countries.


=== Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance ===
The Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance (INDIA) bloc's first joint rally was held in Patna, Bihar on 3 March 2024. The rally saw, among others, Congress president Mallikarjun Kharge, party leader Rahul Gandhi, Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) chief Lalu Prasad Yadav, former Bihar deputy chief minister Tejashwi Yadav, Samajwadi Party leader Akhilesh Yadav, and senior Left leaders Sitaram Yechury and D. Raja. Kharge attacked Kumar for frequently changing alliances and criticised the BJP for not fulfilling its promise of jobs and neglecting the country's poor and the majority.
The alliance jointly held a rally at Shivaji Park in Mumbai on 17 March, a day after the end of Rahul Gandhi's Bharat Jodo Nyay Yatra. The rally was attended by Gandhi, SS(UBT) president Uddhav Thackeray, NCP(SP) leader Sharad Pawar, RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav, and DMK leader and Tamil Nadu chief minister M. K. Stalin, among many others. At the rally, Gandhi said that he was compelled to launch his yatra due to rising inflation and unemployment in the nation.
A few days after arrest of Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal in connection with the alleged Delhi liquor scam on 22 March, the opposition alliance held a protest rally against the same in Ramlila Maidan, Delhi on 31 March, where opposition leaders alleged the corruption case on him and his subsequent arrest to be a "fabrication with political motives" and a "witch hunt". At the rally, named "Loktantra Bachao" (Save Democracy), amid current events, the opposition tried to frame the election as being "democracy vs dictatorship".


==== Indian National Congress ====

The Congress campaign was launched from Nagpur at a huge rally in which over 1 million people were expected to have attended on 28 December 2023. This rally also marked the 138th Congress Foundation Day and was being held to energise party cadres for the 2024 general election. Party workers from all over the state were called to join the rally.

On 14 January, the party launched its Bharat Jodo Nyay Yatra, a sequel to the Bharat Jodo Yatra held the previous year. The yatra started in Thoubal, Manipur and ended in Mumbai on 16 March 2024. It covered 6,713 kilometres (4,171 miles) across 14 states.

Rahul Gandhi warned that the whole of India will be on fire if the BJP wins the 2024 parliamentary elections and changes the Constitution, during an address at Delhi's Ramlila Maidan. The party slogan for the election was "Haath Badlega Halaat".


===== Crowdfunding =====
The Congress started a crowdfunding campaign known as Donate for Desh (Donate for the Country) ahead of the general elections. It formally launched the campaign's digital version on 18 December 2023 at a dedicated website. It claimed to be inspired from Mahatma Gandhi's Tilak Swaraj Fund (1920–21). The physical version of the campaign, which be done via door-to-door collection drives, was launched on 28 December.
The campaign received ₹1.45 crore (US$150,000) on its first day, with the top five states in amount of donations being Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, and Karnataka.
By the end of 2023, the campaign received around ₹9 crore (US$940,000), with 30% of the funds being collected from Telangana and Maharashtra alone.
The campaign had collected about ₹20 crore (US$2.1 million) according to the party when on 28 January, it rebranded its crowdfunding campaign to Donate for Nyay (Donate for Justice), in line with Rahul Gandhi's ongoing Bharat Jodo Nyay Yatra. The ensuing crowdfunding campaign collected four crores in 4 days.


===== Funding issues =====
On 16 February 2024, the Congress Party alleged that the Income Tax Department (IT) ordered the freezing of bank accounts by the Congress Party containing 2.1 billion rupees ($25.3 million) as part of an ongoing legal dispute. The Congress Party's treasurer Ajay Maken later added that tax authorities imposed a 2.1-billion rupee ($25 million) lien on 13 February, "virtually sealed" its bank accounts and confiscated 1.1 billion rupees ($14 million). The party's leader Rahul Gandhi complained that the restrictions had rendered the party unable to campaign properly, adding that "Our entire financial identity has been erased." Gandhi also accused Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah of conducting a "criminal action" against the party, which the BJP denied. His mother and former Congress leader Sonia Gandhi also alleged that the tax issues are "part of the systemic efforts to cripple" the party. An appeal is currently pending in the Supreme Court.
According to the IT Department's official sources, it has recovered ₹135 crore from the Congress for breaking the legislation exempting political parties from paying taxes, rather than freezing the party's bank accounts as the opposition party had claimed. The party received notices from the IT department again on 29 March asking it to pay ₹1,823.08 crore (US$191 million). The Congress accused the BJP of engaging in "tax terrorism" and alleged that the BJP is in serious violation of income-tax laws and that the IT department should raise a demand of ₹4,617.58 crore (US$484 million) crore from the BJP for such violations.


==== Communist Party of India (Marxist) ====

The Communist Party of India (Marxist) began their election campaign in Kerala after announcing 15 candidates in the state.


==== Rashtriya Janata Dal ====
The Rashtriya Janata Dal began its campaign with its Jan Vishwas Yatra ("People's Trust Yatra") on 20 February 2024. RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav launched the yatra from Muzaffarpur in Bihar. The yatra lasted until 1 March 2024 and covered 33 districts. In Siwan on 23 February, Yadav termed the BJP "a dustbin" which takes in other parties that have become "garbage".


==== Aam Aadmi Party ====

The election period also coincided with investigations by authorities into state officials belonging to opposition parties, such as Delhi Chief Minister and Aam Aadmi Party leader Arvind Kejriwal, who was under investigation for alleged corruption in the allocation of liquor licences, and Jharkhand Chief Minister Hemant Soren, who was arrested in February 2024 for allegedly facilitating an illegal land sale. The Enforcement Directorate is also investigating four chief ministers not allied with the BJP on various charges, while investigations have been closed on former opposition politicians who have since joined the BJP. Hartosh Singh Bal, a journalist for the current affairs magazine The Caravan told Agence France-Presse that the move by government agencies indicated their behavior as "handmaidens of the ruling party to cow down the political opposition".
Following Kejriwal's arrest on 21 March over the liquor license scam charges, Delhi's finance minister Atishi Marlena Singh accused the BJP of orchestrating a "political conspiracy" against Kejriwal. His arrest also led to clashes between party leaders, supporters and the police on 22 March. Rahul Gandhi, reacting to Kejriwal's arrest, said that a "scared dictator" wants to create a "dead democracy", without naming anyone. After he was released on bail and allowed to vote, Kejriwal urged citizens to "vote against dictatorship". He then returned to prison as part of his bail conditions.
The BJP-led government has been known to use Enforcement Directorate raids to target opposition politicians critical of it, with 95% of cases registered being against opposition leaders. Since 2014, 25 opposition leaders facing corruption charges have joined the BJP, with 23 of them having their inquiries closed or frozen after joining the ruling party. This has led the Congress Party to compare the trend to a "washing machine" in one of its campaign videos.


==== Shiv Sena ====
After an intraparty dispute that led to the splitting of the Shiv Sena party based in Maharashtra, the Supreme Court of India barred the Shiv Sena (UBT) faction which joined the I.N.D.I.A. alliance from using the party's historic bow-and-arrow symbol as its electoral symbol in balloting and awarded it instead to the Balasahebanchi Shiv Sena wing which joined the NDA. This led the UBT faction to adopt a torch as its electoral symbol.


=== Party manifestos ===


==== Bharatiya Janata Party ====

The BJP proposed a 'GYAN' formula consisting of four segments – Garib (poor), Yuva (youth), Annadata (farmers) and Nari (women) in its manifesto. The Bharatiya Janata Party started a campaign to gather public recommendations and suggestions for the advancement of the State and the country, which will be incorporated into the party's manifesto titled 'Modi ki guarantee' for the 2024 general elections.

Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam: In order to assure women's representation in the legislatures of the states and the national leadership, the BJP pledged to systematically implement the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam.
Lakhpati Didi: 30,000,000 rural women are being empowered to become "Lakhpati Didis".
Free ration: Under the PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana, the BJP announced that it would give 800,000,000 citizens free rations for the next five years.
Increasing MSP: on crops on a periodic basis was pledged in the manifesto. 6,000 rupees in annual financial support under the PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana.
Free electricity: The PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana's free power for low-income homes was another pledge in the manifesto.
3 Crore house: In the PM Housing Scheme, the BJP manifesto pledges to build 30,000,000 houses, people with disabilities will now be given priority, and care will be taken to make sure they are housed in accordance with their unique requirements.
For youngsters: BJP pledge to enact laws to stop the leak of competitive test question papers. Increase the startup ecosystem's reach to encourage youth entrepreneurship. Expanding job prospects in the manufacturing sector. Creating jobs through the development of infrastructure. Creating jobs through growing the tourism industry.
For truck drivers: Construction of modern buildings with facilities which allows truck drivers to rest, park, and have access to clean drinking water and food on all national highways.
One Nation, One Election: In its manifesto, or Sankalp Patra, the BJP includes "One Nation, One Election," for the general elections. This implies that simultaneous elections for the Lok Sabha and all the state assemblies may take place in 2029.
Uniform Civil Code: The manifesto includes the implementation of the Uniform Civil Code (UCC).
Free Ayushman for all senior citizens: Under the Ayushman Bharat Yojana, all senior citizens would be eligible for free, high-quality healthcare up to Rs 5 Lakhs.
US$5 trillion economy: The BJP pledges to increase India's GDP to US$5 trillion by 2025 and $10 trillion by 2032. The Ministry of Finance has predicted that India's economy will rank third overall in the world. Earlier in 2018 and then again in 2019, Modi had stated the goal of the country reaching a GDP of US$5 trillion by 2022 and 2024 respectively, which went unrealized.
United Nations Security Council: committed to securing India's UN Security Council permanent membership.
Crack down on terrorism:  Initiatives to create partnership to eliminate global terror and crack down on terror funding.
Left wing extremism: Fighting Left-Wing Extremism by promoting growth and utilizing a variety of approaches.
Third-largest economic power: India will rank as the country with the third-largest GDP. India's rank rose from the 11th to the 5th largest GDP in the last ten years.
Man on Moon and Bharatiya Antariksha Station: to establish a permanent Bharatiya Antariksha Station and send a man to the moon.


==== Indian National Congress ====

The Congress released their group-specific manifesto promises for the general election in the month of March. The manifesto focuses on five major segments of the  population and promises them:

Youth Manifesto: formal employment for a year to under 25 graduate students, filling of 3,000,000 government job vacancies, transparency in government job recruitment, ₹5,000 crore (US$605,000) fund for startups, standardisation of the government recruitment exam process, and social security for gig workers.
Women Manifesto: ₹100,000 in financial assistance to women from poor families, 50% of new government job recruitments to women, double central government's contribution to the salary of anganwadi, ASHA, and midday meal workers, legal assistance in every panchayat, and at least one hostel for working women in district headquarters.
Farmers Manifesto: legal guarantee on MSP for farmers, waiving off of farmers' loans, an import-export policy favourable to them, removal of GST from agricultural commodities, and payments directly into farmers' bank accounts within 30 days in case of crop loss.
Labourers Manifesto: Universal healthcare coverage for workers, increasing national minimum wage to ₹400 (US$4.8) per day from the current ₹172 (US$2.1) per day, an urban employment guarantee law similar to MGNREGA in the rural areas, life and accident insurance for informal sector workers.
Caste census: The Congress party declared that, if it wins the election, it will conduct a comprehensive census called to survey the population, socio-economic conditions, and representation in governance institutions. It also promised to bring in legislation to eliminate the 50% cap on reservations for SC, ST, and backward classes and to protect tribal forest rights. Rahul Gandhi's call for "jitni abadi, utna haq" (distribution of public resources proportionate to the population) and the combined demands of the opposition parties (SP, RJD, and Congress) for a caste census.
The complete manifesto titled Nyay Patra (Hindi: न्याय पत्र, lit. 'Justice Paper') was released on 5 April 2024. Some noticeable points in the manifesto include (apart from above promises released earlier) the:

Introduction of a law to recognize civil unions between couples belonging to the LGBTQIA+ community.
Implementation of the Rajasthan Model of cashless insurance up to 2,500,000 for universal healthcare.
Prohibitions on dumping of effluents into water bodies across India.
Increasing of forest cover as India has lost the second – highest forest cover after Brazil between 2015 and 2020.
Establishment of community sports centers at every block and municipality level as well as multi – sport center at every district level.
Establishment of government medical colleges – cum – hospitals in all districts of India.
Abolition of the Agnipath Scheme and a return to the normal recruitment processes followed by the Army, Navy and Air Force.
Waiving of student education loans as a one – time measure outstanding as of 15 March 2024.
Provision of one day in a week to discuss the agenda suggested by the opposition benches in each House of Parliament.
Non – intervention with personal choices of food and dress, to love and marry, and to travel and reside in any part of India. All laws and rules that interfere unreasonably with personal freedoms will be repealed.
Decriminalisation of the offence of defamation and provide, by law, a speedy remedy by way of civil damages.
Rejection of the 'One Nation One Election' idea.
Establishment of a National Judicial Commission (NJC) responsible for the selection and appointment of judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court.
Amending of the Constitution to create two divisions in the Supreme Court: a Constitutional Court and a Court of Appeal. The Constitutional Court consisting of the seven most senior judges will hear and decide cases involving the interpretation of the Constitution and other cases of legal significance or national importance. The Court of Appeal will be the final court of appeal that will, sitting in Benches of three judges each, hear appeals from the High Court and National Tribunals.
Elimination of the "Angel tax" and all other exploitative tax schemes that inhibit investment in new micro, small companies and innovative start-ups.


== Misinformation ==
Narendra Modi, on 21 April during an election campaign rally in Rajasthan, falsely claimed that former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh once said "Muslims have the first right on the country's resources". However, Singh's speech also mentioned backward communities, including scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, Other Backward Classes, women, children, and minorities. Modi falsely claimed that Rahul Gandhi had not named Gautam Adani and Mukesh Ambani throughout the elections. Gandhi had mentioned Adani and Ambani about 25 times.
In April 2024, the BBC reported that Generative artificial intelligence and deepfake videos were allegedly used by both the BJP and the opposition parties in the 2024 elections.
An alleged doctored video of BJP leader Amit Shah’s speech regarding reservations in Telangana on April 23 was posted by Telangana Congress on the social media platform X (formerly Twitter), where Amit Shah was falsely shown to be announcing the curtailment of reservations granted to the SC, ST, & OBC communities. Shah accused the opposition of tampering with his video, leading to the registration of an FIR and a summons being issued to Telangana's Chief Minister Revanth Reddy. The police arrested two people, one from the Congress party, and another from the opposition Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) in connection with Shah's case. The arrested Congress worker was associated with its social media unit, and was alleged to have created the video. The Congress Party denied the involvement of its worker in this case.
In June 2024, Time noted throughout the elections, associates and supporters of the BJP circulated fake news in order to discredit its opponents and spread hatred against religious minorities.


== Surveys and polls ==


=== Opinion polls ===


=== Exit polls ===
The Election Commission of India banned the publication of all exit polls starting 48 hours before Phase 1 of the election until the end of Phase 7. This was intended to prevent exit polls from earlier phases affecting voter decisions in later phases. The ban ended after the close of Phase 7 voting at 18:30 IST on 1 June 2024.


== Voting ==

The Phase 1 voting was conducted on 19 April 2024. Re-polling in 11 polling stations of Inner Manipur was held on 22 April due to violence. Re-polling was conducted for eight polling stations in Arunachal Pradesh on 24 April due to reports of violence and EVM damage.
The Phase 2 voting was conducted on 26 April 2024. Re-polling was conducted on 29 April for a polling station in Chamarajanagar due to violence and EVM damage and for six polling stations in Outer Manipur on 30 April due to violence, EVM damage and forced voting allegedly carried out by unidentified armed individuals. Re-polling was also conducted for a polling station in Ajmer on 2 May 2024, due to a misplaced voters' register.
The Phase 3 voting was conducted on 7 May 2024. The voter turnout for the third phase of Lok Sabha elections reached 65.68%. In this phase, 17.24 crore (172,400,000) citizens, comprising 8.85 crore (88,500,000) men and 8.39 crore (83,900,000) women, were eligible to cast their votes.
The Phase 4 voting was conducted on 13 May 2024, in which 96 constituencies voted.
The Phase 5 voting was conducted on 20 May 2024, in which 49 constituencies voted.
The Phase 6 voting was conducted on 25 May 2024, in which 58 constituencies voted.
The Phase 7 voting was conducted on 1 June 2024, in which 57 constituencies voted. Repolling at one booth each in the Barasat and Mathurapur constituencies of West Bengal was held on 3 June, due to violence.


=== Incidents ===
During Phase 1 of the election, violence broke out outside a polling station in Thamanpokpi in Manipur. Clashes between BJP and TMC party workers were reported in the Cooch Behar, Alipurduar and Jalpaiguri constituencies of West Bengal, and one Central Reserve Police Force (CPRF) personnel was found dead in a polling booth in Cooch Behar. In Chhattisgarh, one CRPF personnel was killed during polling. Clashes between VCK and BJP cadres were reported in Chidambaram constituency in Tamil Nadu, where two VCK cadres and one BJP cadre were injured.
During Phase 2 of voting, eight voters in Kerala died of heat stroke while voting. In Manipur, two CPRF personnel were killed and two more were seriously injured in a militant attack in Bishnupur district, a man was killed in a gunfight between two unidentified groups in the Kangpokpi and Imphal East districts, and incidents of EVM vandalism, voter intimidation and coercion were reported in two polling stations in Ukhrul.
A complaint letter by the Samvidhan Bacchao Nagrik Abhiyan (Save the Constitution Citizens' Campaign) organisation to the Election Commission of India, signed by over 17,400 people, alleged that Modi had violated the Model Code of Conduct and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 by making a speech "aiming at not only appealing to 'communal feelings' but also instigating and aggravating hatred in the Hindus against Muslims".
During Phase 6 of voting, Mehbooba Mufti, who is contesting the Anantnag–Rajouri constituency in Jammu and Kashmir for the Jammu and Kashmir People's Democratic Party, said several of her party workers were detained by police to prevent them from voting. In West Bengal, TMC workers blocked the car of BJP candidate Agnimitra Paul while she was on her way to vote in the Medinipur constituency. Prashant Jagdev, the BJP candidate for the 2024 Odisha Legislative Assembly election in Begunia, was arrested on suspicion of vandalising an EVM.
During Phase 7 of voting, a mob looted election material from a polling booth and dumped it into a pond in Kultali, Jaynagar in West Bengal. Clashes erupted between BJP and TMC supporters in Sandeshkhali. In Uttar Pradesh, at least 33 election workers, including security and sanitation staff, died of heat stroke, along with a voter waiting in line in Ballia. State election officials subsequently stated that compensation of 1.5 million rupees ($18,000) would be given to the families of the deceased workers. At least ten election related deaths were also reported in Bihar that day. In response to the ongoing heatwave, ECI chief Rajiv Kumar said they had learned a lesson and "should have completed the election at least one month before".
Instances of EVM malfunctioning and removal of candidates belonging to the opposition were reported throughout the elections. On 18 April, the Supreme Court asked the ECI to look into reported EVM malfunctioning in Kerala. 150 EVMs were replaced in Assam after reported malfunctioning. In Varanasi, about 33 nominations challenging Narendra Modi were rejected, of which eight applicants claimed that the process was rigged in favour of the BJP.
On 4 June, former Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel said there was a discrepancy in EVM numbers while former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav accused the administration of carrying out arrests of his party workers in order to stop them from counting votes.


=== Voter turnout ===
642 million people voted in the election including 312 million women voters, making it the highest ever participation in a single election.


== Turnout ==


== Results ==

Following the first round, the BJP won its first seat after Mukesh Dalal, its candidate for Surat constituency in Gujarat, was elected unopposed following rejection and withdrawal of other candidates. No voting was held in the constituency, as the ECI had certified the results two weeks prior due to the absence of rival candidates.
The overall election result was described in several media sources as a "shock" to Narendra Modi, with the BJP falling short of its expectations of winning 400 seats. Though pre-poll predictions were for an overwhelming majority for the BJP, the INDIA bloc performed much better than exit polls had predicted it to, with upset victories in major states such as Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, and West Bengal. The BJP had to rely on the 28 cumulative seats won by the Andhra Pradesh-based Telugu Desam Party led by Chandrababu Naidu and the Bihar-based Janata Dal (United) led by Nitish Kumar in order for the NDA to retain its majority in the Lok Sabha.


=== By alliance and party ===


=== By region ===


=== By state or union territory ===


=== Seat composition ===


=== State Wise Results ===


==== Andhra Pradesh (25) ====


==== Arunachal Pradesh (2) ====


==== Assam (14) ====


==== Bihar (40) ====


==== Chhattisgarh (11) ====


==== Goa (2) ====


==== Gujarat (26) ====


==== Haryana (10) ====


==== Himachal Pradesh (4) ====


==== Jharkhand (14) ====


==== Karnataka (28) ====


==== Kerala (20) ====


==== Madhya Pradesh (29) ====


==== Maharashtra (48) ====


==== Manipur (2) ====


==== Meghalaya (2) ====


==== Mizoram (1) ====


==== Nagaland (1) ====


==== Odisha (21) ====


==== Punjab (13) ====


==== Rajasthan (25) ====


==== Sikkim (1) ====


==== Tamil Nadu (39) ====


==== Telangana (17) ====


==== Tripura (2) ====


==== Uttar Pradesh (80) ====


==== Uttarakhand (5) ====


==== West Bengal (42) ====


==== Andaman and Nicobar Islands (1) ====


==== Chandigarh (1) ====


==== Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (2) ====


==== Delhi (7) ====


==== Jammu and Kashmir (5) ====


==== Ladakh (1) ====


==== Lakshadweep (1) ====


==== Puducherry (1) ====


== Aftermath ==

Narendra Modi called the NDA's lead "a historical feat in India's history", while Congress party president Mallikarjun Kharge said the election was a "moral and political loss" for Modi and a "win for democracy" and the public. In a speech to his supporters on 4 June, Modi said that the NDA would form a third consecutive government. Following a meeting with other members of the NDA on 5 June, Modi was formally endorsed to become prime minister again. On 7 June, he was selected as leader of the NDA and was inaugurated as prime minister on 9 June.  On 10 June, Modi unveiled his 71-member cabinet, of which the BJP took 61 portfolios, including foreign affairs, home affairs, finance and defence, while the Telugu Desam Party and Janata Dal (United) took two ministries each, with the rest going to other members of the NDA. The BJP's Om Birla was reelected for a second term as Speaker of the Lok Sabha on 26 June.
Independent MPs from Sangli and Purnia, Vishal Patil and Pappu Yadav, both of whom are primary members of the Congress party, extended their support to it after the election, effectively increasing the opposition alliance's tally to 236. On 8 June, the leadership of the Congress Party unanimously nominated Rahul Gandhi to become Leader of the Opposition, a position which had been vacant since 2014. He formally assumed the post on 25 June.


== Reactions ==


=== International ===
Leaders and officials of Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Cambodia,  Canada, China, Comoros, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Eswatini,  European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, the Maldives, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritius, Moldova, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Russia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Taiwan, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor Leste, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United States, Vietnam, Yemen, and Zambia congratulated Modi on his victory.


=== Stock markets ===
The benchmark BSE Sensex and Nifty50 indices hit intraday record highs and the Indian rupee strengthened after the exit polls were released. However, on the day results were announced, Indian stock markets crashed. Rahul Gandhi subsequently called for an investigation, saying that Modi, Amit Shah, and finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman had misled investors into buying stocks before the release of the election results on 4 June in anticipation of a landslide victory by the BJP.


== See also ==
2024 elections in India
2024 Rajya Sabha elections
2024 Speaker of the Lok Sabha election
Elections in India
Election Commission of India
2025 Indian electoral controversy


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to 2024 Indian general election at Wikimedia Commons